Spatial Grafting: Grounding 3D Features for
Flow-Matching Robot Policies
Dingsheng Liu∗§, Yangzheng Wu†, Mahboubeh Asadi†, Zhiyuan Li∗§
Jinbang Huang†, Yixin Xiao†, Tongtong Cao‡, Yingxue Zhang†
∗University of Toronto
†Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
‡Department of Foundation Model, 2012 Labs
Abstract—Pretrained robot manipulation policies such as
vision-language-action models (VLAs) or world-action models
(WAMs) leave interaction-relevant metric geometry implicit.
Recent breakthroughs in spatial reconstruction can supply the
necessary geometry reliably, but their features describe local
shape without stating where it lies with respect to the robot.
How best to deliver these features to a pretrained policy re-
mains unresolved. We propose SPATIAL GRAFTING, a versatile,
lightweight spatial module that binds frozen reconstruction
features to metric, robot-relative geometry. SPATIAL GRAFTING
constructs metric-grounded spatial tokens and injects them into
the flow-matching action expert through cross-attention, without
modifying the host’s perceptual pathway, so the host retains
the full benefit of its pretraining. We evaluate it more broadly
than any geometry-aware policy we compare against: one graft
architecture, with no per-host redesign, on two VLAs and two
WAMs, across four simulation benchmarks that span short-
horizon manipulation, visual robustness, clutter and long-horizon
mobile manipulation, and on three real-robot platforms with
single- and dual-arm configurations. On RoboTwin 2.0, a dual-
arm manipulation benchmark, the graft improves every host
across VLAs and WAMs. Grafted π0.5 gains 11.3% and 15.6%
on clean and randomized scenes, reaching 94.0% and 92.4%,
above the strongest published 3D-conditioned policy, WAM4D
(93.8% and 89.9%). The margin widens as the horizon lengthens:
on tasks from BEHAVIOR-1K, a dual-arm mobile manipulation
challenge scored by average task progress, it surpasses the 2025
challenge winner on five of six tasks, by up to 0.47 Q-score, and
exceeds a map-conditioned spatial policy on average across the
three tasks both report.
I. INTRODUCTION
Coupling a pretrained backbone with a flow-matching action
expert has become the dominant recipe for robot manipu-
lation, with vision-language-action models (VLAs) building
the expert on a vision-language model (VLM) and world-
action models (WAMs) on a video world model [1], [2].
Neither backbone was designed for manipulation or for the
3D structure it depends on: both read a scene as pixels,
with no notion of metric scale or of where a surface lies
relative to the gripper, so the policy selects the right object
and the right sequence of motions yet misplaces the grasp
itself. What is missing is not coarse behaviour but contact-
level precision. The problem this paper addresses is how
§Work done during the internship at Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab.
to supply a flow-matching policy with manipulation-relevant
spatial information it can act on.
Spatial reconstruction foundation models such as Depth
Anything 3 (DA3) [3] and VGGT-Ω[4] are the natural source.
They recover dense metric structure from ordinary images,
and because they are learned networks rather than geometric
pipelines, a policy can read their latent features directly.
A growing body of spatial action models already adds 3D
information to policies, but three gaps remain. First, most are
validated on one or two benchmarks and a single host, so
it is difficult to attribute a gain to the geometry rather than
to the surrounding design. Second, many depend on inputs
a deployed robot does not have: privileged instance labels
or object state from a simulator, dedicated depth or point-
cloud sensors, or a scene map maintained across the episode.
Third, each is built for one policy family, often as a new 3D
architecture trained from scratch, and does not transfer to the
strongest pretrained hosts. The open question is therefore not
whether geometry helps, but how to effectively deliver it to
flow-matching action policies.
SPATIAL GRAFTING is that interface (Figure 1). Rather
than converting reconstruction output into an explicit repre-
sentation, we ground the reconstruction model’s latent space
itself: each frozen latent is bound, at its own grid location,
to its metric position in the workspace and to its offset
from every end effector, and the bound tokens are grafted
by cross-attention into the final blocks of the host’s action
expert. The graft needs RGB, camera calibration and a depth
map, measured or predicted by the same frozen model; it
uses no segmentation, no object state, and keeps no map or
state between observations. The host’s perception pathway is
untouched, the added parameters are 4–5% of a 3–5B host, and
the graft is routed so that it cannot help without reading the
geometry. Because the interface asks only for a flow-matching
action expert, one construction serves both VLAs and WAMs.
We evaluate it more broadly than any spatial action model we
compare against (Table VI): four hosts, two VLAs and two
WAMs; four simulation benchmarks that each isolate a dif-
ferent demand—short-horizon manipulation on LIBERO [5],
visual robustness on RoboTwin 2.0 [6], clutter and collision
on RoboPRO [7], and long-horizon mobile manipulation on
BEHAVIOR-1K (B1K) [8]; and three real robots, single-arm,
arXiv:2609.35249v1  [cs.RO]  28 Sep 2026


Fig. 1. Overview of SPATIAL GRAFTING. A frozen geometry foundation model extracts multi-level features from each RGB view. Depth, calibrated rays,
and end-effector anchors bind those features to metric, robot-relative 3D locations, forming a spatial bank per view. The magnified graft layer acts only on
the flow-matching action expert: action tokens first cross-attend to the primary-view bank; the updated states then query the auxiliary-view banks. A single
bias-free linear projection fuses the auxiliary attention outputs into the action update. This layer repeats in selected late action blocks, leaving the host’s
vision-language or video pathway ungrafted.
bimanual and humanoid. Our main contributions are threefold:
• Robot-grounded reconstruction latents. Prior work has
used reconstruction latents or metric geometric grounding
separately. We bind each latent to metric and end-effector-
relative coordinates, turning a frozen reconstruction space
into a robot-grounded representation for direct action
prediction. Bank-off and bank-shuffle ablations show that
the gain comes from grounded content rather than added
capacity (Section V-C).
• A grafting interface for any flow-matching action
expert. The graft uses bank-only cross-attention in the
final action-expert blocks, which are revisited at every
denoising step, and requires no other host modification.
With bias-free projections, zero banks induce zero change
(Proposition 1). The same interface improves two VLAs
and two WAMs from public checkpoints and remains
effective across reconstruction backbones (Sections V-A
and V-C).
• Broad evaluation across benchmarks and embodi-
ments. Across four hosts, four benchmarks, and three
real robots, we use only RGB, calibration, and measured
or predicted depth, including simulator-provided depth in
RoboTwin. Grafted π0.5 outperforms the strongest pub-
lished 3D-conditioned policy on RoboTwin and improves
the B1K challenge winner’s performance on five of six
tasks; across both RoboPRO hosts, grafting improves
all eight host–condition entries (Sections V-A and V-B,
Tables II–V).
II. RELATED WORK
Action models and reconstruction models: Modern ma-
nipulation policies attach a continuous action expert, trained
by diffusion or flow matching [1], [9], [10], to a pretrained
backbone: a VLM in VLAs [11]–[13] or a video world
model in WAMs [2], [14]. Both backbones perceive in 2D,
so the expert receives neither metric scale nor the position
of a surface relative to the gripper, and the residual failures
concentrate at contact. Reconstruction foundation models are
the complementary resource: they regress dense metric depth
and pointmaps from ordinary images [3], [4], [15]–[19], and
their latent features encode structure learned far beyond any
robot dataset.
Spatial action models: Prior work has supplied geometry
to policies as explicit signals: point clouds through a branch
into the action module [20], [21], estimated-depth position
encodings on the VLM’s tokens [22], depth tokens [23], [24],
and persistent scene maps [25]; earlier 3D policies attended to
lifted features relative to the gripper but trained from scratch
[26], [27]. These designs pay for their geometry with an RGB-
D or point-cloud sensor, with privileged simulator labels and a
prebuilt map, or with a bespoke architecture, and each serves
one policy family. A second line uses reconstruction latents
instead, as a training-time alignment target [28]–[31], so that
no geometry is present at test time and the gain is bounded
by what the host internalizes. Alternatively, the latents are
fused into the VLM’s visual tokens [32], [33], where the
latent arrives in the camera’s frame at an unknown scale and
is compressed by the trunk before the action expert sees it.
Both lines report at most three evaluation settings on a single
host (Table VI), and the two studies that compare injection
routes find that where geometry enters decides the outcome
[32], [33].
The missing interface: Taken together, prior work has
treated where geometry comes from (a sensor or a reconstruc-
2


tion model) and where it enters (the input, the loss or the
action module) as separate questions, and has not delivered
reconstruction latents to a pretrained action expert in the frame
a controller needs. A latent describes the scene relatively, in
the camera’s frame and up to scale; a policy must learn a
correlation between what it observes and where, in absolute
metric units and relative to its end effectors, it should act.
SPATIAL GRAFTING supplies that interface. It binds each
frozen latent, at its own grid location, to its absolute metric
position and to its offset from every end effector, so no point
cloud, map or privileged label is needed; it delivers the bound
tokens through a bank-only route into the final blocks of
the action expert, so added capacity cannot help without the
geometry; and it asks the host for nothing but a flow-matching
expert, so one construction serves both VLAs and WAMs. We
compare against six of the methods above: SERF on B1K, and
SpatialVLA, GeoVLA, Spatial Forcing, GLaD and WAM4D
on LIBERO and RoboTwin.
A. Detailed related-work comparison
Geometry signals and host policies: Table VI expands the
comparison in Section II by separating the pretrained hosts
from methods that explicitly supply geometric information.
The host rows describe the policies to which we attach the
graft—π0.5 [12], X-VLA [13], Fast-WAM [2], and LingBot-
VA [14]—not competing 3D modules. Among the spatial
action models, SpatialVLA [22] and GeoVLA [21] use depth-
derived positions or point clouds, while Spatial Forcing [28]
and GLaD [29] distill frozen reconstruction features during
training. SERF [25] instead maintains a persistent map of
the scene and robot. These are different sources of spatial
information: explicit coordinates locate observations, distilled
features provide a learned geometric prior, and persistent maps
retain information beyond the current view. The “training
only” annotation distinguishes supervision that shapes the
deployed policy from an additional geometric input supplied
at inference.
Where geometry enters: The route column distinguishes
methods even when they use similar signals. SpatialVLA mod-
ifies visual-token positions, 3D-Mix [32] fuses reconstruction
and semantic features, and Spatial Forcing and GLaD align
intermediate representations. GeoVLA and PointVLA [20]
deliver point-cloud information to an action expert. GeoPre-
dict [34] uses auxiliary geometric prediction, while DyWA
[35], GWM [36], WAM4D [30], X-WAM [37], and MECo-
WAM [31] use geometric prediction or reconstruction to shape
action-relevant representations or world-model rollouts. Our
distinction is therefore not simply using 3D features or adding
an action-side module. We bind frozen features to metric,
end-effector-relative geometry and route the added residual
through spatial banks in the late action layers. This separates
the source of the features from their robot-relative grounding
and from the mechanism by which they modify an action.
The bank interventions in Section V-C test dependence on that
information, rather than attributing every benefit of an added
module to geometry.
Evaluation coverage and comparison limits: The final
column records the settings reported for each method, not
a common-protocol leaderboard. In particular, RoboTwin 1.0
is distinct from RoboTwin 2.0, and a real-robot evaluation
can involve different embodiments, tasks, and trial counts.
BEHAVIOR-1K coverage is also task-specific: SERF [25]
reports three tasks, while our results report six individual tasks
rather than a benchmark-wide aggregate. The table highlights
that we examine the same grafting interface across tabletop
simulation, distribution shift, long-horizon mobile manipula-
tion, and physical robots, using both VLA and WAM hosts. It
does not imply that every host was tested in every setting or
that broader coverage establishes higher performance. Quanti-
tative comparisons and their provenance are given in Section V
and Section VII; the controlled comparisons remain each host
with and without its graft.
III. METHOD
A. Problem formulation
A pretrained policy πθ(A | I, T , S) maps N RGB views
I = {Iv}N
v=1, an instruction T and proprioceptive state S to
an action chunk A. We consider hosts whose action expert is a
transformer trained by flow matching [1], [2], [38] and re-run
once per integration step at inference, whether it reads a VLM
trunk or a video stream. Beyond the host’s inputs, the graft
assumes per-view calibration C = {(Kv, Tv)}N
v=1 (intrinsics
and camera-to-world pose Tv = (Rv, tv) in one common
frame), a metric depth map D⋆
v measured by the sensor or
predicted by the same frozen reconstruction model, and at
least one wrist camera per arm; no other input is assumed:
no segmentation, object state or map. From these SPATIAL
GRAFTING builds one bank per view, Bv = Bv(Iv, C, D⋆
v),
and adds graft parameters ψ, leaving the host intact: A ∼
πθ,ψ(A | I, T , S, {Bv}N
v=1).
B. Grounding the latent space: the spatial bank
Binding happens at the grid: one bank token per feature-
grid location, so the correspondence between a latent and its
metric point is never broken. The result is a grounded latent
space rather than a geometric representation: no point is ever
materialized as a cloud or map, and the tokens are rebuilt from
the current observation alone. For each view v we tap frozen
backbone layers LG on a common grid of P locations. Taps
differ in scale by orders of magnitude, so each is normalized,
projected, rescaled by a learned gain and tagged with a layer
embedding before fusion to ϕv,i ∈Rd, for d the action-expert
width.
Metric and robot-relative geometry: Back-projecting grid
location i through (Kv, Tv) and D⋆
v yields a point pv,i
and viewing direction qv,i in the common calibration frame.
Coordinates are normalized as ˆp = clip((p −c)/λ, −1, 1)
about a workspace centre c with a single isotropic scale λ
per embodiment, so that a 10 cm displacement is encoded
identically along every axis. With e1, . . . , eE the end-effector
anchors, taken as the optical centres ek = tk of the wrist
3


cameras (a fixed rigid offset from the gripper, so no kinematic
model is needed), each location carries
uv,i =

γB(ˆpv,i);
n
γB( \
pv,i −ek)
oE
k=1 ; qv,i; mv,i

,
(1)
with γB a Fourier encoding [39] and mv,i flagging valid depth.
The absolute coordinate places the feature in the workspace;
the relative ones expose reaching and contact, and change as
the arms move even when the scene is static.
Binding: ϕv,i and uv,i describe the same location and
become one token: uv,i modulates ϕv,i through FiLM [40],
and the two are concatenated and projected into the bank token
zv,i ∈Rd (Section IV), so geometry enters both directly and
by modulation.
C. A bank-only graft for any flow-matching action expert
Geometry enters only the final M blocks of the action
expert, whose states already encode much of the base trajec-
tory; the perceptual pathway receives no graft. Flow matching
motivates this placement: the sampler re-enters these blocks
at every integration step on a progressively cleaner chunk, so
the banks are read over exactly the interval in which a coarse
action becomes precise. M spans the last quarter to third of
the stack; grafting every block is worse (Section V-C). The
interface touches the host at exactly two points, the action-
token states H(l) and the residual update at block l; a new
host changes only the expert width d, the number of grafted
blocks M and the residual scale ρ, plus a linear bridge when
its blocks are wider than the injection (Table I).
Each view v has an independent multi-head cross-attention
with queries Q from the action states and keys and values
from its bank B:
CA(l)
v (Q, B) = W (l,v)
O
Attn

ν

W (l,v)
Q
LN(Q)

,
ν

W (l,v)
K
N(B)

, W (l,v)
V
N(B)

,
(2)
where N normalizes the key/value stream, ν normalizes
queries and keys per head, and the logits carry a clamped
learned gain. The primary view v = 1, typically the global
scene camera, writes into the action stream first, with residual
scale ρ: ¯H(l) = H(l)+ρ CA(l)
1 (H(l), B1). Each auxiliary view
then queries its own bank from this updated state through a
learned projection, A(l)
v
= CA(l)
v (P (l)
v
¯H(l), Bv). A single bias-
free linear projection W (l)
merge fuses the concatenated auxiliary
outputs [A(l)
2 ; . . . ; A(l)
N ] back into the stream, and the result
˜H(l) replaces H(l) in each grafted block (Section IV-A,
Algorithm 1).
Bank-only routing: The projections P (l)
v
build queries
only, and the merge consumes the attention outputs A(l)
v
rather
than the branch activations, which would compose two linear
layers into a bank-independent action-state map. Zero banks
then imply a zero graft delta (Proposition 1); we verify it
empirically with bank-off rather than assume it (Sections IV-B
and IV-C). The graft adds 147M trainable parameters to π0.5
and X-VLA, 214M to Fast-WAM and 277M to LingBot-VA,
which is 4.4% of the 3.3B π0.5 and 5.4% of the 5.1B LingBot-
VA (Table I).
D. Training objective
Each grafted host keeps its own flow-matching objective
and finetuning recipe; the graft only adds the banks to the
conditioning set of the velocity field. With noise ϵ ∼N(0, I),
level σ ∈[0, 1], interpolant Aσ = (1−σ)A+σϵ and the host’s
weighting w(σ),
L(θ, ψ) = EA,ϵ,σ w(σ)
vθ,ψ
 Aσ, σ | I, T , S, {Bv}

−(ϵ −A)
2
2,
(3)
where vθ,ψ is the host’s velocity head evaluated with H(l) ←
˜H(l) in the final M blocks; there is no auxiliary geometric
supervision (Section VI). Three scheduling choices are not
neutral and are ablated in Section V-C: the output projections
start at small non-zero values, the host is held fixed for a brief
warmup, and the graft residual is dropped jointly across blocks
with probability pdrop.
IV. METHOD DETAILS
A. Derivations and full grafting equations
Back-projection: Let ˜xv,i be the homogeneous image
coordinate of location i, with normalized camera ray rv,i =
K−1
v
˜xv,i/∥K−1
v
˜xv,i∥2. Treating D⋆
v,i as optical-axis depth, the
world-frame point and viewing direction used in Section III-B
are
pv,i = Rv
 D⋆
v,i
rv,i,z
rv,i

+ tv,
qv,i = Rvrv,i.
(4)
Injection: Writing H(l) for the action-token states at
a grafted block l, CA(l)
v
for the per-view cross-attention of
Eq. (2), P (l)
v
for the view-specific query projections and ρ > 0
for the shared residual scale, the two stages inside the injection
module are
¯H(l) = H(l) + ρ CA(l)
1

H(l), B1

,
(5)
A(l)
v
= CA(l)
v

P (l)
v
¯H(l), Bv

,
v = 2, . . . , N,
(6)
˜H(l) = ¯H(l) + ρ W (l)
merge ConcatN
v=2 A(l)
v ,
(7)
The merge is a single bias-free linear projection of the
attention outputs A(l)
v , not the branch activations P (l)
v
¯H(l);
with two auxiliary wrist views its input has width 2d, and with
one it has width d. The module returns ∆(l) = ˜H(l) −H(l),
and the caller applies H(l)′ = H(l) + glκ∆(l). Here gl
selects the final M blocks and whole-graft dropout draws one
κ ∼Bernoulli(1 −pdrop) per sample per step, shared across
those blocks; kept samples are not rescaled.
4


Parameter cost: Each grafted block holds one primary
cross-attention, N −1 query projections, N −1 auxiliary cross-
attentions and one merge, and the bank builder is shared by
all of them, so
|ψ| = M (6N −2) d2
|
{z
}
grafted blocks
+ |ψbank|
| {z }
bank builder
+ |ψbridge|,
(8)
with d the injection width. With N = 3 views and d = 1024,
each grafted block costs 16d2 = 16.8M, so the injection grows
linearly in the number of grafted blocks M and quadratically
in d. The bank builder is 46.0M for every host, and |ψbridge|
is non-zero only when the host’s blocks are wider than the
injection width. Table I gives the measured counts.
Frame parameters: The workspace centre c and isotropic
scale λ define the frame the graft reasons in, so they are fitted
once per embodiment on the training split and stored with the
checkpoint. The hand-relative encodings use their own fitted
centres, distinct from the workspace centre. Where the end-
effector anchors are taken as wrist-camera optical centres, each
differs from the true end-effector position by a fixed rigid
offset, which the geometry encoder absorbs.
B. The bank-only invariant
Proposition 1 (Bank-only invariant). If every projection on
a bank-dependent path (WK, WV , WO, Wmerge) is bias-free
and the key/value normalization N is scale-only, then B1 =
· · · = BN = 0 implies H(l)′ = H(l) at every grafted block l.
Proof. Scale-only normalization gives N(0) = 0, so Bv = 0
yields zero keys and values. The attention output is a convex
combination of zero value vectors, hence 0 for any query, and
the bias-free output projection maps it to 0. Thus ¯H(l) = H(l),
and A(l)
v
= 0 for v ≥2 regardless of P (l)
v
¯H(l), so the bias-free
merge projection maps the concatenation of zeros to zero and
H(l)′ = H(l).
Implementation status: The π0.5 implementation uses
the attention-output merge, eliminating the direct linear path
from an auxiliary query projection to the action stream.
Setting spatial_no_bias=True removes biases from the
auxiliary attention output projections and the merge, but the
primary attention output projection, key/value projections and
key/value LayerNorm still have trainable biases. Their biases
initialize at zero, so a zero bank gives a zero delta at ini-
tialization; Proposition 1 is not guaranteed for the trained
checkpoint. A nonzero bias can emit a scene-independent
constant even with a zero bank. We therefore interpret bank-off
as a measurement of the trained model with its banks removed,
not as an assumed-zero residual.
C. Architectural verification
Proposition 1 establishes an exact-zero invariant only under
its stated bias and normalization conditions. Before training,
we check numerically that a zero spatial bank gives zero graft
residual and a nonzero bank gives a nonzero one. This verifies
initialization, not that the invariant continues to hold after the
remaining biases have trained. For the Fast-WAM instantiation,
strict checkpoint loading verifies the frozen host snapshot
and every added bank-builder and grafting parameter. The
evaluation preflight additionally checks view ordering, RGB
and depth preprocessing, calibrated intrinsics and extrinsics,
the 32-action prediction and 24-action execution contract, and
live construction of a nonzero bank from the current three-
view observation. Measured depth is retained at millimeter
precision and aligned to the 18 × 24 DA3 feature grid with
nearest-neighbor resampling.
These checks separate initialization and wiring from down-
stream empirical performance. Bank-off measures the trained
graft with its banks removed; bank-shuffle measures whether
its gain depends on the banks’ sample-specific geometry
(Section V-C).
V. EXPERIMENTS
Hosts and comparison protocol: We apply SPATIAL
GRAFTING to four hosts chosen to span both families of
flow-matching policy: two VLAs, π0.5 and X-VLA, and two
WAMs, Fast-WAM and LingBot-VA, and the graft is identical
across every host. The reconstruction backbone is DA3, kept
frozen and tapped at four layers on a common feature grid, and
the spatial banks enter the final six action-expert blocks of the
VLAs and the final ten of the WAMs; the only host-specific
settings are the ones listed in Section III-C.
Benchmarks and baselines: We evaluate on four sim-
ulation benchmarks and three real robots, each under its
standard protocol and each chosen to stress a different demand.
LIBERO (130 tasks, 50 seeds per task) is near saturated
and tests whether the graft leaves a working policy intact.
RoboTwin 2.0 (50 dual-arm tasks, 20 seeds per task in each
of the Clean and Randomized configurations) tests SPATIAL
GRAFTING’s manipulation capability and robustness to ap-
pearance changes. RoboPRO (80 tasks, 20 seeds per task
in clean and cluttered scenes, scored under both its Easy
and Hard criteria) adds clutter objects in the robot’s path
and its success metric penalizes collisions. B1K (six tasks,
20 public evaluation instances each) is the most difficult
manipulation benchmark we test: long-horizon mobile manip-
ulation that chains sub-skills together within a large household
environment, and shows the breadth of SPATIAL GRAFTING’s
application. The real-robot trials (10 per task) test whether
the gains survive measured depth and real calibration error.
Success rates (SR) are reported in %, and every reported
change is an absolute difference. Beyond each host’s own base,
we compare against the published 3D-conditioned policies
listed in Table II and, on B1K, against SERF and the two
leading entries of the 2025 challenge. Host configurations,
training data, depth sources and the provenance of every
quoted number are documented in Sections VI and VII, and
per-task results in Section VIII.
We ask three questions, one per contribution: does one
graft improve both VLAs and WAMs (Section V-A); do
the gains hold under clutter, long horizons and real sensing
(Section V-B); and do they come from the grounded geometry
and its placement rather than added parameters (Section V-C)?
5


TABLE I
TRAINABLE PARAMETERS ADDED BY THE GRAFT ON ROBOTWIN. COUNTS ARE MEASURED BY BUILDING THE MODULES. THE SHARE IS RELATIVE
TO THE HOST’S OWN PARAMETER COUNT.
Host
Grafted blocks
Bank builder
Injection
Bridges
Total (share)
π0.5
6
46.0M
100.7M
–
146.8M (4.4% of 3.3B)
X-VLA
6
46.0M
100.7M
–
146.8M
π0.5, VGGT-Ω
6
48.1M
100.7M
–
148.9M
Fast-WAM
10
46.0M
168.0M
–
214.0M
LingBot-VA
10
46.0M
168.0M
62.9M
276.9M (5.4% of 5.09B)
Algorithm 1 SPATIAL GRAFTING: bank construction and grafting at one denoising step. The exact-zero claim of Proposition 1
is conditional on bias-free bank-dependent paths.
Require: RGB images {Iv}N
v=1, calibration {(Kv, Tv)}, metric depth {D⋆
v}, end-effector anchors {ek}E
k=1, host action states
H(l), frozen spatial model G, grafted-block count M
Bank construction
▷once per observation
1: for v = 1, . . . , N do
2:
{F (l)
v }l∈LG ←G(Iv)
▷frozen multi-layer taps
3:
ϕv ←Wfuse Concatl(LN(Pl(F (l)
v )) + ηl)
4:
pv, qv ←back-project D⋆
v through (Kv, Tv)
▷Eq. (4)
5:
uv ←[γB(ˆpv); {γB( \
pv −ek)}k; qv; mv]
▷Eq. (1)
6:
sv ←MLP(uv);
f ′
v ←(1 + Γ(sv)) ⊙ϕv + β(sv)
▷FiLM binding
7:
zv ←LN(Wout[sv; f ′
v]) + grid and view embeddings
8:
Bv ←zv −meantokens(zv)
▷per-sample centering
9: end for
Injection into the final M blocks
10: draw κ ∼Bernoulli(1 −pdrop)
▷one draw shared by every block
11: for l = L −M + 1, . . . , L do
12:
¯H ←H(l) + ρ CA(l)
1 (H(l), B1)
▷primary view
13:
Av ←CA(l)
v (P (l)
v
¯H, Bv) for v = 2, . . . , N
▷P (l)
v
builds queries only
14:
˜H ←¯H + ρ W (l)
merge Concatv≥2 Av
▷merges attention outputs
15:
H(l)′ ←H(l) + κ ( ˜H −H(l))
16: end for
A. One graft improves every host
RoboTwin: consistent gains, robust to visual change:
RoboTwin’s paired Clean and Randomized configurations use
the same dual-arm tasks, separating task capability from
robustness to scene and appearance changes. All four hosts
improve, by +7.5% on Clean and +8.2% on Randomized on
average. The VLAs gain most (+9.8% to +15.6%), while
the WAMs also benefit despite their stronger base scores.
Every host also improves on Randomized scenes, by +1.5% to
+15.6%, although the reconstruction backbone is frozen and
is not fine-tuned on RoboTwin’s randomized clutter, lighting
or backgrounds: geometry learned from diverse scenes carries
across appearance changes the host has not seen. Qualitatively,
the mug column of Figure 2 shows the mechanism: the grafted
policy estimates the rack height well enough to clear the
hook, where the base approaches at the wrong height. At
the task level, the largest per-task gain for π0.5 is Move can
pot, 51% →100% Clean and 55% →95% Randomized
(base per-task rates from [14]): the can must be set down
at a position defined relative to the pot, which is exactly
the robot-relative metric placement the bank encodes. Blocks
ranking size, which needs the blocks’ physical sizes, is next
(49% →85%, 26% →70%).
Grafted π0.5 reaches 94.0%/92.4%, above the best pub-
lished 3D-conditioned policy, WAM4D (93.8%/89.9%), and
our full-benchmark Spatial Forcing run (66.2%/58.9%) is
below every grafted host. These cross-paper rows are not
host-matched; the controlled result is that all four base/graft
pairs improve. Per-task results for every policy we evaluated
ourselves are in Section VIII, Table VIII.
LIBERO: maintained performance on a saturated bench-
mark: Every base already scores 96.9–98.5, so this benchmark
can only show whether the graft integrates well into a working
policy. The two VLAs improve (+2.7% for π0.5, +0.6% for
X-VLA) and the two WAMs slip by about 1% (−0.7% and
−1.1%), with all final scores remaining in the near-saturated
range (Table II). Grafted π0.5 is the highest entry at 99.6%,
but a 1.1% lead on a saturated benchmark is not evidence
about geometry; we treat LIBERO as a compatibility check of
one frozen reconstruction model across four action experts and
draw no conclusion about geometry from it. Per-suite results
are in Section VIII, Table VII.
6


TABLE II
LIBERO AND ROBOTWIN SR (%). ABOVE THE LINE: PUBLISHED 3D-CONDITIONED POLICIES, QUOTED FROM THEIR OWN PAPERS, EXCEPT SPATIAL
FORCING ON ROBOTWIN, WHICH WE TRAINED OURSELVES (SECTION VII). BELOW THE LINE: OUR FOUR HOSTS. LIBERO BASES ARE QUOTED FROM
EACH HOST’S PUBLISHED RESULTS; THE π0.5 ENTRY IS FROM THE OPENPI RELEASE [41], AS ITS PAPER REPORTS NO LIBERO RESULT. ON ROBOTWIN,
THE π0.5 BASE IS CITED FROM [14] AND THE X-VLA BASE FROM [42], BOTH TRAINED ON THE SAME ROBOTWIN DEMONSTRATIONS AS OUR GRAFTS,
SO THE PAIRS ARE DIRECTLY COMPARABLE; THE FAST-WAM AND LINGBOT-VA BASES ARE OUR EVALUATIONS OF THEIR PUBLIC CHECKPOINTS WITH
OUR SEEDS AND PIPELINE. EVERY GRAFTED ENTRY IS OUR RUN. GREEN/RED: ABSOLUTE CHANGE FROM THE HOST’S OWN BASE. NR: NOT REPORTED
IN THE CITED PAPER.
Model
LIBERO Avg.
RoboTwin Clean
RoboTwin Rand.
GLaD
94.1
NR
NR
GeoVLA
97.7
NR
NR
SpatialVLA
78.1
NR
NR
Spatial Forcing
98.5
66.2
58.9
WAM4D
NR
93.8
89.9
π0.5 →πgraft
0.5
96.9 →99.6+2.7
82.7 →94.0+11.3
76.8 →92.4+15.6
X-VLA →X-VLAgraft
98.1 →98.7+0.6
72.8 →83.7+10.9
72.8 →82.6+9.8
Fast-WAM →Fast-WAMgraft
97.6 →96.9−0.7
82.6 →86.0+3.4
81.8 →83.3+1.5
LingBot-VA →LingBot-VAgraft
98.5 →97.4−1.1
88.9 →93.3+4.4
85.7 →91.4+5.7
SPATIAL GRAFTING: base →graft
B. Gains hold under clutter, long horizons and real sensing
B1K: largest gains where grasping is hardest: Of the
spatial action models we compare, only SERF [25] reports
B1K results, on three tasks. Grafting the challenge-winning
π0.5-RLC [43] increases average task progress (Q-score; Ta-
ble III); we evaluate on the 20 public evaluation instances
of each task, whereas official challenge scoring uses only
10 of those 20. The graft improves five of the six tasks, by
+0.216 Q-score on average and up to +0.471; the exception
is putting shoes on rack (0.720 →0.590). B1K chains minute-
long mobile activities without resetting between contacts, so a
small error in one action chunk leaves the robot in a state its
demonstrations rarely cover, and the next chunk starts further
out of distribution. We attribute the graft’s gains at this horizon
to the same precision it adds on the tabletop: each contact lands
closer to where the demonstrations put it, so there is less error
to compound.
SERF [25] builds on the same π0.5-RLC checkpoint but
addresses a different failure: its persistent map gives a mem-
oryless policy access to information about objects that have
left its view (Section II), whereas the graft targets precision at
contact and keeps no state across observations. On the three
tasks SERF reports, the grafted policy averages 0.632 against
SERF’s reported 0.587; the margin is modest because those
tasks are dominated by the failure SERF addresses.
The graft’s largest gains come where the policy fails at the
grasp itself: on the other three tasks it improves its base by
+0.301 on average. Putting up Christmas decorations requires
picking up a thin, smooth candy cane among the wire stems
of a wreath; in Figure 2 the base closes beside the shaft
while the grafted policy closes on it. Its Q-score gain is
small (0.478 →0.510) because the base already completes
much of the activity. Clean boxing gloves has rounded gloves
that can be grasped only at the cuff (0.200 →0.600), and
cleaning up plates and food requires lifting flat plates and
bowls (0.243 →0.714). The graft helps most where the grasp
is hardest, consistent with its design objective.
RoboPRO: improved collision avoidance in clutter: Both
hosts improve in every condition on both Easy and Hard
(Table IV). Cluttered scenes place distractors inside the path
the demonstration sweeps, and the Hard rate additionally
penalizes collisions with them. Hard rises together with Easy
in every cell, so the grafted policies complete more tasks
without colliding: under clutter, π0.5 gains +8.9% Easy and
+1.6% Hard, and X-VLA gains +5.6% Easy and +7.7%
Hard, more than its clean-scene Hard gain of +3.2%. Knowing
where each distractor sits relative to the grippers lets the policy
route around it; the sink column of Figure 2 shows a grasp low
and square enough to seat the plate rather than catch its rim.
Per-task results for all 80 tasks are in Section VIII, Table IX.
Real robots: gains transfer to physical sensing: The real-
robot trials test whether the gains survive measured depth and
real calibration error, on three platforms of different form: a
single-arm UR5e, a bimanual pair of AgileX Pipers and the
humanoid Galaxea R1Pro. Grafting improves success on all
six tasks, by 20% to 50% (Table V), and the largest gains
come where the base fails on depth at contact: marker grasping
(30% →80%, approach at the wrong height), Piper table
cleanup (20% →70%, transparent objects missed and a white
mug confused with the background) and R1Pro tangerine
placement (50% →90%, fruit dropped short of the plate).
Plate-to-rack placement improves from 70% to 90% through
better rack alignment (Figure 2; full-size rollouts in Figure 4)
and deformable-object cleanup from 50% to 80%. Tea-can
opening remains hardest (10% →40%): lid-depth errors are
reduced, but the task also demands bimanual coordination
that geometry alone does not supply. That the graft carries
to hardware without any adaptation of its geometry pathway
is expected: DA3 is trained on large and diverse real-world
imagery, so its reconstruction is, if anything, better matched
to real scenes than to simulated ones, and the grounded latents
the graft reads are the same on either side of the simulation
boundary.
7


TABLE III
B1K Q-SCORE ON SIX TASKS. Q-SCORE IS AVERAGE TASK PROGRESS. π0.5-RLC AND π0.5-Comet ARE THE #1 AND #2 ENTRIES OF THE 2025
CHALLENGE [8] AND SERF [25] IS QUOTED ON THE THREE TASKS IT REPORTS; ALL THREE ARE TAKEN FROM THEIR PUBLISHED SCORES. THE
GRAFTED POLICY IS EVALUATED ON THE 20 PUBLIC EVALUATION INSTANCES OF EACH TASK; OFFICIAL CHALLENGE SCORING USES ONLY 10 OF THOSE
20. GREEN/RED: CHANGE FROM THE HOST’S OWN BASE.
Task
SERF
π0.5-Comet
π0.5-RLC →πgraft
0.5-RLC
Assembling gift baskets
0.525
0.312
0.281 →0.632+0.351
Collecting children’s toys
0.635
0.583
0.500 →0.673+0.173
Putting shoes on rack
0.601
0.470
0.720 →0.590−0.130
Putting up Christmas decorations
NR
0.356
0.478 →0.510+0.032
Clean boxing gloves
NR
0.000
0.200 →0.600+0.400
Cleaning up plates and food
NR
0.043
0.243 →0.714+0.471
SPATIAL GRAFTING: base →graft
R1Pro
orange on plate
Piper
plate on rack
B1K
pick up candy
RoboTwin
hang mug
RoboPRO
plate in sink
Fig. 2. Grafted success (top) against base failure (bottom), one column per benchmark. Each column is the task discussed in the corresponding paragraph.
R1Pro: the grafted policy estimates plate height and releases the orange with clearance, where the base drops it short. Piper: plate–rack alignment avoids the
collision the base drives into. B1K: the base shuts its jaws beside the candy cane’s shaft; the grafted policy closes on it. RoboTwin: rack height is estimated
well enough to clear the hook. RoboPRO: a lower, better-placed grasp seats the plate in the sink instead of catching its rim.
TABLE IV
ROBOPRO SUCCESS (%). EACH CELL READS EASY/HARD. EASY IS ROBOPRO’S SUCCESS RATE (SR); HARD IS ITS STRICTER HARSH SUCCESS RATE
(HSR), SCORED ON THE SAME EPISODES. BASES ARE REPORTED BY [7] AND GRAFTED SCORES ARE OURS. GREEN: CHANGE FROM THE HOST’S OWN
BASE.
Model
Clean (Easy/Hard)
Clutter (Easy/Hard)
π0.5 →πgraft
0.5
70.3 / 65.7 →78.8 / 73.7+8.5/+8.0
60.9 / 47.8 →69.8 / 49.4+8.9/+1.6
X-VLA →X-VLAgraft
49.5 / 46.7 →60.9 / 49.9+11.4/+3.2
39.7 / 27.6 →45.3 / 35.3+5.6/+7.7
SPATIAL GRAFTING: base →graft
C. The gain comes from the grounded geometry and its
placement
Bank content, not capacity, carries the gain: Figure 3(a)
intervenes on a fixed π0.5 checkpoint on RoboTwin. Zero-
ing the banks cuts Clean/Randomized by 15.1%/20.1% to
78.9%/72.3%, below the ungrafted base. Substituting another
episode’s banks cuts a further 24.3%/23.4% to 54.6%/48.9%.
Weights and host inputs stay fixed: mismatched bank content
hurts more than absent banks, and bank-only routing removes
a direct action-state bypass.
The backbone is interchangeable; late injection is essen-
tial: The π0.5 RoboTwin reference uses frozen DA3 features
at four levels, the complete spatial grid, and injection into the
final six action-expert blocks; host-specific configurations are
in Section VI. Panel (b) retrains one design change at a time
from this reference, which also uses dropout and warmup. Re-
placing DA3 [3] with VGGT-Ω[4], everything else unchanged,
reaches 91.5% on Clean and 89.1% on Randomized. This
is 2.5% and 3.3% below the reference but 8.8% and 12.3%
above the base: the interface transfers across reconstruction
backbones, while its ceiling still depends on their quality.
8


TABLE V
REAL-ROBOT EVALUATION (SR, %). MATCHED BASE/GRAFT COMPARISONS ON THREE PLATFORMS, WITH 10 TRIALS PER TASK. A TRIAL IS
CONSIDERED SUCCESSFUL ONLY IF ALL SUB-TASKS ARE COMPLETED. GREEN: CHANGE FROM THE BASE.
Platform Task
SR
Trials
UR5e
Pick up marker and place in pen cup (thin objects, constrained placement)
30 →80+50
10
Piper
Clean up table (transparent objects, long horizon)
20 →70+50
10
Open tea can (bimanual dexterous manipulation)
10 →40+30
10
Place plate on rack (thin objects, constrained placement)
70 →90+20
10
R1Pro
Pick up tangerine and place on plate (thin objects, constrained placement)
50 →90+40
10
Clean up table (deformable object, long horizon)
50 →80+30
10
SPATIAL GRAFTING: base →graft
Spatial
Grafting
Base
(no graft)
Bank-offBank-shuffle
25
50
75
100
Success rate (%)
(a) Reference and checkpoint interventions
94.0
82.7
78.9
54.6
92.4
76.8
72.3
48.9
VGGT-Ω
All 18
blocks
Host
LoRA
No graft
dropout
No graft-
only
warmup
(b) Design choices (retrained)
91.5
86.7
83.4
89.8
77.9
89.1
82.4
77.5
87.4
78.1
Clean
Randomized
Fig. 3. Ablations on RoboTwin with π0.5 (SR %). (a) Reference, ungrafted base, and bank interventions on a fixed checkpoint. (b) One design choice
retrained at a time. Equal-width Clean (green) and Randomized (terracotta) bars overlap at each configuration and share a 25% baseline.
Conditioning all 18 blocks instead of the final six costs 7.3%
and 10.0%, supporting late injection after the host has formed
a task-conditioned action.
Stable adaptation needs warmup and dropout; LoRA is
not enough: LoRA gives 83.4%/77.5%, within 0.7% of the
base on both configurations, whereas full finetuning delivers
the graft. Training without whole-graft dropout (pdrop = 0)
costs 4.2% and 5.0%, showing the value of periodically acting
without the spatial residual. Skipping the graft-only warmup
and adapting the host from the first update costs 16.1% and
14.3%, dropping Clean below the base. This is the largest
single design effect and helps explain why schedules need to
vary with the pretrained host.
Across all variants, the interface’s main effect is to close
the Clean-minus-Randomized gap (Section VI).
VI. REFERENCE GRAFT CONFIGURATIONS
This section records the graft configuration used for the
reported RoboTwin results.
Objective: The loss of Eq. (3) is the host’s own flow-
matching objective with the banks added to its conditioning
set; the noise distribution, weighting and action parameteriza-
tion are the host’s own, and there is no auxiliary geometric
supervision, so a grafted run differs from its baseline only in
the presence of {Bv}.
π0.5–RoboTwin: Initialization is the public pi05_base
checkpoint. The spatial backbone is DA3-GIANT-1.1 in
backbone-only mode, frozen, with taps at layers 19, 27, 33, 39
resampled to an 18 × 24 grid (P = 432) over three calibrated
views, ordered as overhead, left wrist, right wrist. Metric
depth is ground truth from the simulator, retained at millimeter
precision and aligned to the feature grid by nearest-neighbor
resampling. The two end-effector anchors are the optical
centres of the left and right wrist views, recovered from the
same extrinsics used for back-projection. The action-token
transformer has L = 18 blocks and the graft attaches to the
final six blocks 12–17.
Bank and grafting hyperparameters: residual scale ρ = 1;
output projections and FiLM initialized at standard devia-
tion 10−2; Fourier bands B = 10; workspace centre c =
(−0.0222, 0.0967, 0.7403) and isotropic scale λ = 0.5198,
fitted on the training split; grid and view embeddings scaled
by 0.25; query/key normalization enabled; attention logit gain
initialized at 3 and clamped to 8; whole-graft dropout pdrop =
0.1; bank-only routing and bias-free auxiliary attention output
and merge projections enabled; per-tap, fused-latent and per-
sample bank centering all enabled. Evaluation predicts action
chunks under the host’s own flow-matching sampler with 30
denoising steps.
9


Fourier band count: We set B against measurement
precision rather than maximum precision. At the RoboTwin
workspace scale B = 10 resolves roughly 5 mm in the highest
band, while depth is quantized at 1 mm and pooled over a
patch covering one to five centimeters of surface, so further
bands would encode noise rather than geometry.
X-VLA–RoboTwin:
The X-VLA graft uses the same
bank builder and the same grafting topology with identical
settings—ρ = 1, initialization 10−2, B = 10, query/key nor-
malization, pdrop = 0.1, bank-only routing, bias-free auxiliary
attention output and merge projections, and per-tap, fused
and per-sample centering—grafted onto the final six of its
24 action blocks. The PyTorch implementation also omits the
primary attention output bias; the JAX π0.5 implementation
retains it. The hosts, workspace constants, and camera layouts
differ, while the bank construction and two-stage grafting
scheme are shared.
Fast-WAM–RoboTwin: Fast-WAM [2] uses a 30-block
ActionDiT with a pretrained Wan2.2 video expert. The graft
starts from the released robotwin_uncond_3cam_384
checkpoint, attaches to blocks 20–29, and uses three calibrated
views, four DA3-NESTED taps (layers 19, 27, 33 and 39) on
an 18 × 24 grid, and measured metric depth. Only the spatial
bank builder and the ten grafting modules are trained, on the
unchanged RoboTwin training split; DA3-NESTED, the video
and action experts, the variational autoencoder and the proprio
encoder remain frozen. Evaluation predicts 32 absolute-joint
actions, executes 24 before replanning, and uses 10 flow-
matching steps under the raw protocol.
LingBot-VA–RoboTwin: LingBot-VA [14] is an autore-
gressive video-action model with a dual-stream mixture of
transformers. The graft starts from its released RoboTwin post-
training checkpoint, retains its autoregressive video-action
rollout, and attaches the same bank-only interface to the final
ten blocks of its action stream through the linear bridges of
Table I, since its blocks are wider than the injection width;
the video-generation pathway is left unchanged.
Clean-minus-Randomized gap under ablation: The un-
grafted π0.5 base has a 5.9% Clean-minus-Randomized gap
on RoboTwin; the reference graft narrows it to 1.6%. Bank-
off (6.6%) and bank-shuffle (5.7%) restore nearly the base gap,
LoRA leaves it at 5.9%, and the retrained variants narrow it
partially: 2.4% without dropout, 4.3% with all-block injection,
and 2.4% with VGGT-Ω.
VII. EVALUATION PROTOCOL AND PROVENANCE
Matched comparisons: For matched in-house base/graft
runs, we hold the host checkpoint, demonstrations, observa-
tions, action representation, training recipe, and rollout proto-
col fixed; the graft supplies the spatial banks. These paired
results are comparable within a host, whereas scores from
different hosts are not controlled comparisons. Other table
entries are published baselines; their provenance is specified
below.
Benchmark setup and training data: On LIBERO [5], the
simulated embodiment is a single-arm Franka Panda. We meta-
train on all 130 tasks of the original dataset, with 50 demon-
strations per task (6,500 total), and evaluate over 50 seeds per
task. On RoboTwin [6], the embodiment is a simulated dual-
arm Aloha-AgileX. We use all 50 tasks, with 50 clean and 500
randomized trajectories per task (27,500 total), and evaluate
our runs over exactly 20 seeds per task and configuration, the
same seeds for every model (Table VIII). Clean and Random-
ized share tasks but differ in clutter, lighting, background, table
height and instruction phrasing. The VLA hosts start from
broad multi-embodiment pretraining checkpoints; the WAM
hosts start from their released RoboTwin checkpoints.
For B1K [8], [44], we use the challenge’s simulated Galaxea
R1Pro, a wheeled dual-arm robot, and fine-tune a separate
policy for each task from 100 demonstrations. Q-score is the
fraction of an activity’s goal conditions satisfied, averaged over
episodes. We evaluate on all 20 public evaluation instances of
each task. Official challenge scoring uses only 10 of those 20
instances; our reported scores aggregate all 20.
On RoboPRO [7], we use the simulated dual-arm Aloha-
AgileX and train on the full clean and cluttered demonstration
set, approximately 16,000 trajectories across 80 tasks. Evalu-
ation reports the benchmark’s Easy and Hard success criteria.
Cluttered scenes add distractors within the demonstrated mo-
tion path while holding the underlying skills fixed.
Real-robot evaluation uses UR5e, AgileX Piper, and
Galaxea R1Pro, covering thin-object grasping, constrained
placement, multi-step table cleanup, and bimanual manipu-
lation. Each base/graft condition is evaluated over ten trials
per task; success requires completing all subtasks. Table V
specifies the tasks and platforms.
Result provenance: The main tables mix published num-
bers with our own runs; we record the source of each value
here rather than marking it in place. Every SPATIAL GRAFT-
ING entry is trained and evaluated in-house. LIBERO: every
non-grafted entry is quoted from published work. The X-
VLA, Fast-WAM and LingBot-VA bases are taken from their
papers; the π0.5 base is taken from the openpi release [41],
since the π0.5 paper reports no LIBERO result. RoboTwin: the
WAM4D, π0.5 and X-VLA bases are published, the latter two
taken from [14] and [42] respectively; we use these published
values because those models were trained on the same 50-
task RoboTwin demonstration set as our grafts, so base and
graft are directly comparable. The Fast-WAM and LingBot-VA
bases are our evaluations of their public checkpoints with our
in-house evaluation seeds and pipeline, the same seeds used
for every grafted run; and Spatial Forcing is the one reference
we trained ourselves: its paper trains on a seven-task subset,
and we used its public RoboTwin training code on the full
50-task dataset. B1K: the π0.5-Comet and π0.5-RLC scores are
those published by the challenge organizers [8] and the SERF
column is quoted from [25]; our grafted scores are evaluated
on all 20 public evaluation instances of each task, whereas
official challenge scoring uses only 10 of those 20. These
aggregates therefore use different instance sets. RoboPRO:
10


every baseline is from [7].
Published comparators:
GLaD, GeoVLA and Spa-
tialVLA do not report RoboTwin, and WAM4D does not
report LIBERO; these NR entries reflect what the cited papers
evaluate, not what the methods can run. WAM4D’s 93.8/89.9
covers all 50 RoboTwin tasks with 50 clean and 500 random-
ized demonstrations per task, but its host and training differ
from ours, so it is a level rather than a matched comparison. On
B1K, SERF reports three tasks, which we quote in Table III.
VIII. DETAILED BENCHMARK RESULTS
This section reports the per-suite and per-task results behind
the aggregates of the main text. Every value in these tables that
is not marked as quoted from a published work was produced
by us with the evaluation code, seed lists and instance lists
included in the supplementary material, under the protocols
of Section VII.
LIBERO by suite: Table VII breaks the LIBERO averages
of Table II into the four standard suites (Spatial, Object, Goal
and Long) for every host, ungrafted and grafted, alongside
the published reference policies. Each grafted entry is our
evaluation over 50 seeds per task with the supplied evaluation
script.
RoboTwin by task: Table VIII lists Clean/Randomized
success on each of the 50 RoboTwin tasks for every policy
we evaluated ourselves: the four grafted hosts, the ungrafted
Fast-WAM and LingBot-VA checkpoints, and the VGGT-Ω
variant of grafted π0.5. All runs use the same 20 seeds per
task; the seed bank and the evaluation pipeline that produced
these numbers are included in the supplementary material.
RoboPRO by task: Table IX lists Easy/Hard success for
the two grafted hosts on each of the 80 RoboPRO tasks,
in clean and cluttered scenes, over 20 seeds per task. The
evaluation configuration and seed lists are included in the
supplementary material.
IX. LIMITATIONS
Three limitations remain. First, we evaluated only flow-
matching action experts; other policies with accessible action
tokens and residual updates could use the interface but re-
main untested. Second, the length of the graft-only warmup
depended on how close each host already was to the target
data; no single setting was best for all four hosts. Third, errors
in the frozen backbone’s depth or features limit the available
geometry, particularly for high-precision contact.
X. CONCLUSION
This paper started from a specific failure of pretrained flow-
matching policies: VLAs and WAMs select the right object
and the right sequence of motions, yet misplace the grasp,
because their 2D backbones encode neither metric scale nor
where a surface lies relative to the gripper. We argued that the
missing ingredient is not geometry as such, which sensors and
reconstruction models already supply, but an interface. Prior
spatial action models either consume reconstruction latents
without metric grounding or supply explicit metric geometry
without the latents; each is built for one policy family, val-
idated in a limited number of settings, and often dependent
on inputs a deployed robot lacks. SPATIAL GRAFTING is that
interface. It binds each frozen reconstruction latent, at its own
grid location, to its absolute metric position and its offset from
every end effector, and grafts the bound tokens by bank-only
cross-attention into the final blocks of the host’s action expert,
from RGB, calibration and depth alone.
The experiments answer the three questions this framing
poses. One graft improves every host: the same construction,
unchanged, improves two VLAs and two WAMs initialized
from public checkpoints on RoboTwin by +7.5% Clean and
+8.2% Randomized on average, with grafted π0.5 reach-
ing 94.0/92.4, above the strongest published 3D-conditioned
policy, while leaving saturated LIBERO intact. The gains
hold where geometry matters most: all eight RoboPRO
host–condition cells improve, including the stricter collision-
penalizing criterion under clutter; on B1K the graft improves
the challenge-winning policy’s performance on five of six
tasks, by up to 0.47 Q-score and most on the tasks that fail at
the grasp, and exceeds a map-conditioned policy in the mean
of the tasks both report without keeping any scene state; and
on three real robots every task improves by 20% to 50%. The
gain comes from the grounded geometry and its placement
rather than from added parameters: zeroing the banks drops
grafted π0.5 below its own base, substituting another episode’s
banks drops it a further 24%, injecting into every block is
worse than injecting late, and swapping DA3 for VGGT-Ω
keeps most of the gain. Together these results support the
claim of the introduction: a pretrained action expert can act
on reconstruction latents once they are expressed in absolute
metric coordinates and end-effector-relative offsets, and one
such interface serves the current generation of flow-matching
policies. Section IX records what remains open.
REFERENCES
[1] K. Black, N. Brown, D. Driess, A. Esmail, M. Equi, C. Finn, N. Fusai,
L. Groom, K. Hausman, B. Ichter, S. Jakubczak, T. Jones, L. Ke,
S. Levine, A. Li-Bell, M. Mothukuri, S. Nair, K. Pertsch, L. X. Shi,
J. Tanner, Q. Vuong, A. Walling, H. Wang, and U. Zhilinsky, “π0:
A vision-language-action flow model for general robot control,” in
Robotics: Science and Systems (RSS), 2025.
[2] T. Yuan, Z. Dong, Y. Liu, and H. Zhao, “Fast-wam: Do world
action models need test-time future imagination?” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2603.16666, 2026.
[3] H. Lin, S. Chen, J. H. Liew, D. Y. Chen, Z. Li, Y. Zhao, S. Peng, H. Guo,
X. Zhou, G. Shi, J. Feng, and B. Kang, “Depth anything 3: Recovering
the visual space from any views,” in International Conference on
Learning Representations (ICLR), 2026.
[4] J. Wang, M. Chen, S. Zhang, N. Karaev, J. Sch¨onberger, P. Labatut,
P. Bojanowski, D. Novotny, A. Vedaldi, and C. Rupprecht, “VGGT-Ω,”
in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2026.
[5] B. Liu, Y. Zhu, C. Gao, Y. Feng, Q. Liu, Y. Zhu, and P. Stone, “LIBERO:
Benchmarking knowledge transfer for lifelong robot learning,” in Ad-
vances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) Datasets
and Benchmarks Track, 2023.
[6] T. Chen, Z. Chen, B. Chen, Z. Cai, Y. Liu, Q. Liang, Z. Li, X. Lin,
Y. Ge, Z. Gu et al., “RoboTwin 2.0: A scalable data generator and
benchmark with strong domain randomization for robust bimanual
robotic manipulation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.18088, 2025.
11


[7] Z. Li, C. Eret, X. Zhao, Y. Wu, and A. Rasouli, “Data and evaluation
protocols for robust robotic manipulation,” in Data-Centric Robotics
Workshop at Robotics: Science and Systems (RSS), 2026. [Online].
Available: https://robopro-bench.github.io/RoboPRO/
[8] Stanford Vision and Learning Lab, “BEHAVIOR challenge leaderboard:
2025 results,” Official challenge leaderboard, 2025, accessed: 2026-08-
28. [Online]. Available: https://behavior.stanford.edu/challenge/archive/
2025/leaderboard.html
[9] C. Chi, Z. Xu, S. Feng, E. Cousineau, Y. Du, B. Burchfiel, R. Tedrake,
and S. Song, “Diffusion policy: Visuomotor policy learning via action
diffusion,” in Robotics: Science and Systems (RSS), 2023.
[10] S. Liu, L. Wu, B. Li, H. Tan, H. Chen, Z. Wang, K. Xu, H. Su,
and J. Zhu, “RDT-1B: a diffusion foundation model for bimanual
manipulation,” in International Conference on Learning Representations
(ICLR), 2025.
[11] Octo Model Team, D. Ghosh, H. Walke, K. Pertsch, K. Black, O. Mees,
S. Dasari, J. Hejna, T. Kreiman, C. Xu et al., “Octo: An open-source
generalist robot policy,” in Robotics: Science and Systems (RSS), 2024.
[12] K. Black, N. Brown, J. Darpinian, K. Dhabalia, D. Driess, A. Esmail,
M. R. Equi, C. Finn, N. Fusai, M. Y. Galliker, D. Ghosh, L. Groom,
K. Hausman, B. Ichter, S. Jakubczak, T. Jones, L. Ke, D. LeBlanc,
S. Levine, A. Li-Bell, M. Mothukuri, S. Nair, K. Pertsch, A. Z. Ren,
L. X. Shi, L. Smith, J. T. Springenberg, K. Stachowicz, J. Tanner,
Q. Vuong, H. Walke, A. Walling, H. Wang, L. Yu, and U. Zhilinsky,
“π0.5: A vision-language-action model with open-world generalization,”
in Proceedings of the 9th Conference on Robot Learning (CoRL), ser.
Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, vol. 305.
PMLR, 2025,
pp. 17–40.
[13] J. Zheng, J. Li, Z. Wang, D. Liu, X. Kang, Y. Feng, Y. Zheng, J. Zou,
Y. Chen, J. Zeng, Y. Ren, T. Kong, J. Yan, X. Zhang, B. Zhao,
and X. Li, “X-VLA: Soft-prompted transformer as scalable cross-
embodiment vision-language-action model,” in International Conference
on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2026.
[14] L. Li, Q. Zhang, Y. Luo, S. Yang, R. Wang, L. Zhang, M. Yu, Z. Gao,
N. Xue, B. Zhou, X. Zhu, M. Ding, Y. Shen, and Y. Xu, “Causal world
modeling for robot control,” in Proceedings of Robotics: Science and
Systems (RSS), 2026.
[15] R. Ranftl, K. Lasinger, D. Hafner, K. Schindler, and V. Koltun, “Towards
robust monocular depth estimation: Mixing datasets for zero-shot cross-
dataset transfer,” IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine
Intelligence (TPAMI), vol. 44, no. 3, pp. 1623–1637, 2022.
[16] L. Yang, B. Kang, Z. Huang, X. Xu, J. Feng, and H. Zhao, “Depth
anything: Unleashing the power of large-scale unlabeled data,” in
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2024.
[17] L. Yang, B. Kang, Z. Huang, Z. Zhao, X. Xu, J. Feng, and H. Zhao,
“Depth anything V2,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems (NeurIPS), 2024.
[18] S. Wang, V. Leroy, Y. Cabon, B. Chidlovskii, and J. Revaud, “DUSt3R:
Geometric 3D vision made easy,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2024.
[19] V. Leroy, Y. Cabon, and J. Revaud, “Grounding image matching in
3D with MASt3R,” in Proceedings of the European Conference on
Computer Vision (ECCV), 2024.
[20] C. Li, J. Wen, Y. Peng, Y. Peng, and Y. Zhu, “PointVLA: Injecting
the 3D world into vision-language-action models,” IEEE Robotics and
Automation Letters, vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 2506–2513, 2026.
[21] L. Sun, B. Xie, Y. Liu, H. Shi, T. Wang, and J. Cao, “GeoVLA:
Empowering 3d representations in vision-language-action models,” in
IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems
(IROS), 2026.
[22] D. Qu, H. Song, Q. Chen, Y. Yao, X. Ye, Y. Ding, Z. Wang, J. Gu,
B. Zhao, D. Wang, and X. Li, “SpatialVLA: Exploring spatial repre-
sentations for visual-language-action model,” in Robotics: Science and
Systems (RSS), 2025.
[23] T. Yuan, Y. Liu, C. Lu, Z. Chen, T. Jiang, and H. Zhao, “DepthVLA: En-
hancing vision-language-action models with depth-aware spatial reason-
ing,” in Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Robotics
and Automation (ICRA), 2026.
[24] J. Lee, J. Duan, H. Fang, Y. Deng, S. Liu, B. Li, B. Fang, J. Zhang,
Y. R. Wang, S. Lee, W. Han, W. Pumacay, A. Wu, R. Hendrix, K. Farley,
E. VanderBilt, A. Farhadi, D. Fox, and R. Krishna, “Molmoact: Action
reasoning models that can reason in space,” in Proceedings of the IEEE
International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), 2026.
[25] S. Kim, B. Pak, K. Long, Y. Tian, and N. Atanasov, “SERF: Spa-
tiotemporal environment and robot feature map for long-horizon mobile
manipulation,” in Conference on Robot Learning (CoRL), 2026.
[26] T. Gervet, Z. Xian, N. Gkanatsios, and K. Fragkiadaki, “Act3D:
3D feature field transformers for multi-task robotic manipulation,” in
Proceedings of the 7th Conference on Robot Learning (CoRL), ser.
Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, vol. 229.
PMLR, 2023,
pp. 3949–3965.
[27] T.-W. Ke, N. Gkanatsios, and K. Fragkiadaki, “3D diffuser actor:
Policy diffusion with 3D scene representations,” in Conference on Robot
Learning (CoRL), 2024.
[28] F. Li, W. Song, H. Zhao, J. Wang, P. Ding, D. Wang, L. Zeng, and
H. Li, “Spatial forcing: Implicit spatial representation alignment for
vision-language-action model,” in International Conference on Learning
Representations (ICLR), 2026.
[29] M. Guo, M. Cao, J. Tao, R. Xu, Y. Yan, X. Liang, I. Laptev, and
X. Chang, “GLaD: Geometric latent distillation for vision-language-
action models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.09619, 2025.
[30] Y. Li, X. Wei, J. Cao, H. Wang, X. Chi, C. Bai, Q. Sun, J. Li, X. Zhang,
P. Jia, J. Tang, S. Han, and S. Zhang, “WAM4D: Fast 4d world action
model via spatial register tokens,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2606.14048,
2026.
[31] J. Zhang, J. Zhu, T. Su, C. Ma, Z. Huang, Y. Xu, and H. Wang, “Learning
4d geometric priors for inference-efficient world action models,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2607.05468, 2026.
[32] B. Yu, S. Lian, X. Lin, Z. Shen, Y. Wei, H. Liu, C. Wu, H. Yuan,
B. Wang, C. Huang, and K. Chen, “3d-mix for vla: A plug-and-play
module for integrating vggt-based 3d information into vision-language-
action models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.24393, 2026.
[33] Y. Yang, M. Lin, R. Martin-Martin, M. Labrie, S. Gayaka, C.-H. Kuo,
and L. Carlone, “Understanding the impact of geometric foundation
models on vision-language-action models,” in Proceedings of the Eu-
ropean Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), 2026, pp. 21–38.
[34] J. Qian, B. Han, C. Shi, L. Xiao, L. Yang, S. Shi, and L. Jiang, “Geo-
predict: Leveraging predictive kinematics and 3d gaussian geometry for
precise vla manipulation,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2026, pp. 13 529–
13 539.
[35] J. Lyu, Z. Li, X. Shi, C. Xu, Y. Wang, and H. Wang, “DyWA: Dynamics-
adaptive world action model for generalizable non-prehensile manipu-
lation,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on
Computer Vision (ICCV), 2025, pp. 11 058–11 068.
[36] G. Lu, B. Jia, P. Li, Y. Chen, Z. Wang, Y. Tang, and S. Huang, “GWM:
Towards scalable gaussian world models for robotic manipulation,” in
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer
Vision (ICCV), 2025, pp. 9263–9274.
[37] J. Guo, Q. Li, P. Li, Z. Chen, N. Sun, Y. Su, H. Wang, Y. Zhang, X. Li,
and H. Liu, “Unified 4d world action modeling from video priors with
asynchronous denoising,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.26694, 2026.
[38] Y. Lipman, R. T. Q. Chen, H. Ben-Hamu, M. Nickel, and M. Le,
“Flow matching for generative modeling,” in International Conference
on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2023.
[39] M. Tancik, P. P. Srinivasan, B. Mildenhall, S. Fridovich-Keil, N. Ragha-
van, U. Singhal, R. Ramamoorthi, J. T. Barron, and R. Ng, “Fourier
features let networks learn high frequency functions in low dimen-
sional domains,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
(NeurIPS), vol. 33, 2020.
[40] E. Perez, F. Strub, H. De Vries, V. Dumoulin, and A. Courville, “Film:
Visual reasoning with a general conditioning layer,” in Proceedings of
the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, vol. 32, 2018.
[41] Physical Intelligence, “openpi: Open-source models and code for
robot learning,” https://github.com/Physical-Intelligence/openpi, 2025,
lIBERO results for the pi05_libero checkpoint.
[42] H. Bi, H. Tan, S. Xie, Z. Wang, S. Huang, H. Liu, R. Zhao, Y. Feng,
C. Xiang, Y. Rong, H. Zhao, H. Liu, Z. Su, L. Ma, H. Su, and J. Zhu,
“Motus: A unified latent action world model,” in Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
(CVPR), 2026, pp. 35 101–35 113.
[43] I. Larchenko, G. Zarin, and A. Karnatak, “Task adaptation of vision-
language-action model: 1st place solution for the 2025 BEHAVIOR
challenge,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.06951, 2025.
[44] C. Li, R. Zhang, J. Wong, C. Gokmen, S. Srivastava, R. Mart´ın-Mart´ın,
C. Wang, G. Levine, M. Lingelbach, J. Sun et al., “BEHAVIOR-1K: A
12


benchmark for embodied AI with 1,000 everyday activities and realistic
simulation,” in Conference on Robot Learning (CoRL), 2023.
13


Successful rollout
Failure case
Real R1Pro
fruit placement
The model
without grafting
leaves insufficient
clearance when placing
the tangerine.
Real Piper
plate placement
(wrist views)
The model
without grafting
misaligns the plate
and collides with the rack.
Real Piper
tea-can opening
The model
without grafting
grasps the tea-can lid
too high
and immediately drops it.
Real UR5e
marker grasp
The model
without grafting
grasps the marker
too high.
B1K
(R1Pro), candy pickup
The model
without grafting
grasps the candy
too high.
RoboTwin
(ALOHA), hang mug
The model
without grafting
provides insufficient
clearance to hang the mug.
RoboPRO
(ALOHA), plate pickup
The model
without grafting
grasps the plate
too high.
Fig. 4. Success and failure modes across platforms. Left and right show successful and failed rollouts. For R1Pro fruit placement, improved plate-height
estimation leaves clearance above the rim, while the failure approaches too low. For Piper plate placement, better plate–rack alignment avoids collision; the
two panels use left- and right-wrist fisheye cameras, respectively. In B1K candy pickup and RoboPRO plate pickup, target depth supports a lower grasp pose.
In RoboTwin mug hanging, estimating the rack height positions the mug at the support. The added Piper tea-can opening and UR5e marker-grasp panels are
cropped and AI-enhanced for visual clarity; generative deblurring may reconstruct fine details, so these panels are illustrative rather than unaltered experimental
frames.
14


TABLE VI
HOST POLICIES AND GEOMETRY-AWARE POLICIES. ROWS FOLLOW SECTION II. STATUS IS THE VENUE AS OF SUBMISSION; “REAL” DENOTES
REAL-ROBOT EXPERIMENTS; TEST-TIME INPUTS ARE WHAT THE DEPLOYED POLICY CONSUMES BEYOND PROPRIOCEPTION. THE FOUR HOSTS CARRY NO
GEOMETRY MODULE. EVERY GEOMETRY-AWARE METHOD REPORTS AT MOST THREE EVALUATION SETTINGS; SPATIAL GRAFTING REPORTS FIVE, ON
FOUR HOSTS.
Method
Status
Geometry signal
Route into the model
Test-time inputs
Evaluation
Hosts: VLAs and WAMs
π0.5
CoRL’25
None
VLM trunk co-trained with a flow-matching action
expert
RGB
Real
X-VLA
ICLR’26
None
Embodiment-specific soft prompts into a
flow-matching transformer
RGB
LIBERO; SimplerEnv;
CALVIN; VLABench;
RoboTwin; Real
Fast-WAM
arXiv’26
None
Video and action experts in a shared mixture of
transformers; no video generation at inference
RGB
LIBERO; RoboTwin; Real
LingBot-VA
RSS’26
None
Autoregressive video/action tokens in a mixture of
transformers
RGB
LIBERO; RoboTwin; Real
Spatial action models compared in Section V
SpatialVLA
RSS’25
Egocentric 3D points from
estimated depth
Position encoding added to the VLM’s visual tokens
RGB (depth estimated)
LIBERO; SimplerEnv; Real
GeoVLA
IROS’26
Point cloud from depth
Learned point encoder; tokens fed with VLM
embeddings to a 3D-enhanced action expert
RGB-D sensor
LIBERO; ManiSkill2; Real
Spatial Forcing
ICLR’26
Frozen VGGT features
(training only)
Alignment of intermediate visual embeddings; no 3D
input at inference
RGB
LIBERO; RoboTwin; Real
GLaD
arXiv’25
Frozen VGGT features
(training only)
Distillation into the language model’s hidden states
over visual tokens
RGB
LIBERO; LIBERO-PRO
WAM4D
arXiv’26
Future depth (training only)
Spatial register tokens and a depth head, removed for
deployment
RGB
RoboTwin; Real
SERF
CoRL’26
Persistent neural-point map of
scene and robot
Map tokens prepended to π0.5’s inputs
RGB-D, simulator
instance labels, prior
map
B1K (3 tasks)
Wider geometry-aware literature
PointVLA
RA-L’26
Point-cloud features
Additive adapters in the action expert
RGB + point cloud
RoboTwin 1.0; Real
GeoPredict
CVPR’26
3D keypoint tracks and
Gaussian geometry (training
only)
Auxiliary predictive supervision
RGB
LIBERO; RoboCasa; Real
3D-Mix
arXiv’26
Frozen VGGT features
Gated fusion with the VLM’s semantic features
RGB
LIBERO; SimplerEnv
DyWA
ICCV’25
Partial and goal point clouds
Joint action and next-state prediction
Point cloud
Custom simulation; Real
GWM
ICCV’25
Dynamic 3D Gaussians
Action-conditioned Gaussian rollouts feed a separate
policy
RGB
Meta-World; RoboCasa; Real
X-WAM
arXiv’26
Future depth
Replicated late diffusion-transformer blocks predict
depth
RGB
RoboCasa; RoboTwin; Real
MECo-WAM
arXiv’26
Frozen VGGT 4D targets
(training only)
4D expert with decayed read-mask attention,
removed for deployment
RGB
LIBERO; RoboTwin; Real
Ours
—
Frozen multi-layer features
+ metric geometry
Bank-only cross-attention into the late action
layers
RGB, calibration,
depth (measured or
predicted)
LIBERO; RoboTwin;
RoboPRO; B1K; Real
TABLE VII
DETAILED LIBERO SR (%). RESULTS ACROSS THE FOUR STANDARD SUITES. VALUES FOR EXTERNAL METHODS ARE REPORTED BY THEIR
RESPECTIVE WORKS; THE π0.5 BASE IS FROM THE OPENPI RELEASE [41]. HOST AVERAGES MATCH TABLE II; DASHES INDICATE UNAVAILABLE
PER-SUITE RESULTS, NOT ZERO SUCCESS. BLOCKS GROUP OTHER BASELINES, EXISTING 3D METHODS, AND OUR HOSTS. GREEN/RED: CHANGE FROM
THE HOST’S OWN BASE.
Method
Spat.
Obj.
Goal
Long
Avg.
π0
96.8
98.8
95.8
85.2
94.1
OpenVLA-OFT
97.6
98.4
97.9
94.5
97.1
GLaD
95.0
97.4
94.4
89.4
94.1
GeoVLA
98.4
99.0
96.6
96.6
97.7
Spatial Forcing
99.4
99.6
98.8
96.0
98.5
SpatialVLA
88.2
89.9
78.6
55.5
78.1
π0.5
98.8→99.8+1.0
98.2→99.8+1.6
98.0→99.8+1.8
92.4→99.0+6.6
96.9→99.6+2.7
X-VLA
98.2→99.4+1.2
98.6→99.6+1.0
97.8→98.8+1.0
97.6→97.0−0.6
98.1→98.7+0.6
Fast-WAM
98.2→98.0−0.2
100.0→98.4−1.6
97.0→97.2+0.2
95.2→94.0−1.2
97.6→96.9−0.7
LingBot-VA
98.5→98.6+0.1
99.6→99.0−0.6
97.2→98.2+1.0
98.5→93.8−4.7
98.5→97.4−1.1
SPATIAL GRAFTING: base →graft
15


TABLE VIII
PER-TASK ROBOTWIN SR (%), CLEAN/RANDOMIZED. EACH CELL READS CLEAN/RANDOMIZED OVER EXACTLY 20 SEEDS PER TASK; EVERY MODEL
AND EVALUATION USES THE SAME SEEDS. DA3 IS THE SPATIAL BACKBONE UNLESS MARKED VGGT-Ω; FAST-WAM AND LINGBOT-VA WITHOUT A
SUPERSCRIPT ARE THE UNGRAFTED PUBLIC CHECKPOINTS. THE AVERAGE IS THE MEAN OF THE 50 PER-TASK RATES.
Task
πgraft
0.5
X-VLAgraft
Fast-WAM
Fast-
WAMgraft
LingBot-VA
LingBot-
VAgraft
πgraft
0.5
(VGGT-Ω)
Adjust bottle
100/100
100/95
100/95
100/100
100/100
95/95
100/100
Beat block hammer
100/100
90/85
100/100
100/95
100/100
100/100
100/95
Blocks ranking RGB
100/95
100/85
95/85
100/90
75/90
100/100
100/100
Blocks ranking size
85/70
75/85
60/65
65/85
85/50
95/90
85/75
Click alarmclock
95/100
10/30
100/100
100/100
100/100
100/100
95/100
Click bell
100/100
70/90
100/100
100/100
100/100
100/100
95/100
Dump bin bigbin
95/90
95/90
95/95
95/95
90/100
85/95
80/90
Grab roller
100/100
100/100
100/100
100/100
100/100
100/100
100/100
Handover block
90/95
100/85
60/95
95/85
80/80
100/95
95/95
Handover mic
100/100
95/90
95/85
100/100
65/100
95/95
100/95
Hanging mug
50/45
55/45
15/25
40/35
35/30
30/30
20/15
Lift pot
100/100
100/100
95/95
100/90
100/100
100/100
95/90
Move can pot
100/95
100/85
80/75
95/70
85/100
90/100
100/95
Move pillbottle pad
100/100
95/100
100/100
100/95
95/95
100/100
100/100
Move playingcard away
100/100
100/100
95/100
100/100
100/95
100/100
100/100
Move stapler pad
90/85
70/75
65/70
65/75
75/70
55/65
80/70
Open laptop
100/100
90/95
95/100
90/100
100/100
100/95
95/95
Open microwave
70/70
55/10
55/75
80/50
90/75
85/80
75/80
Pick diverse bottles
95/100
50/10
85/95
100/100
80/90
90/90
95/80
Pick dual bottles
100/100
100/100
95/95
100/95
100/100
100/100
100/100
Place a2b left
95/100
85/80
75/35
45/55
100/75
100/100
100/100
Place a2b right
95/100
70/75
70/30
40/55
95/60
100/95
100/100
Place bread basket
100/100
95/90
90/85
95/100
100/95
100/100
95/90
Place bread skillet
80/85
90/85
85/85
95/80
100/90
90/90
80/95
Place burger fries
95/95
100/95
95/100
90/95
90/95
100/85
100/95
Place can basket
85/75
80/75
70/85
80/70
80/90
85/80
90/75
Place cans plasticbox
100/100
100/100
100/100
100/100
100/100
100/100
100/100
Place container plate
100/100
100/100
95/90
100/100
100/100
100/95
100/100
Place dual shoes
100/80
80/80
90/95
85/80
65/90
100/90
90/80
Place empty cup
100/100
80/90
70/75
95/55
100/65
100/100
100/100
Place fan
100/95
75/90
90/100
80/100
90/95
100/95
100/95
Place mouse pad
80/95
70/75
75/80
75/80
75/75
100/85
80/70
Place object basket
85/95
90/95
55/40
50/55
85/50
90/90
85/70
Place object scale
100/95
85/90
90/40
60/75
90/90
95/95
90/100
Place object stand
100/100
90/100
90/75
90/90
100/85
100/95
100/100
Place phone stand
100/90
95/85
90/90
95/90
100/90
100/95
90/90
Place shoe
100/100
100/100
85/95
95/100
90/95
100/100
95/95
Press stapler
90/95
100/95
95/95
95/95
95/90
80/90
85/95
Put bottles dustbin
100/85
95/95
80/95
95/85
85/100
90/75
100/90
Put object cabinet
80/75
75/60
60/0
55/25
85/60
85/80
95/70
Rotate QR code
90/100
100/90
95/90
90/90
85/100
95/90
100/90
Scan object
80/85
90/80
5/10
40/0
70/5
100/95
90/80
Shake bottle
100/100
100/100
100/100
100/100
100/100
100/100
100/100
Shake bottle horizontally
100/100
100/100
100/100
100/100
100/100
100/100
100/100
Stack blocks three
95/90
25/35
100/100
80/100
90/100
100/80
55/75
Stack blocks two
100/85
95/85
100/100
100/95
100/100
100/100
95/95
Stack bowls three
95/90
65/75
70/95
85/85
60/85
90/90
80/70
Stack bowls two
100/100
85/95
95/100
95/95
100/95
100/100
100/100
Stamp seal
100/85
65/70
80/95
100/80
80/80
90/90
90/85
Turn switch
85/80
55/90
50/60
70/75
80/55
55/60
80/75
Average
94.0/92.4
83.7/82.6
82.6/81.8
86.0/83.3
88.9/85.7
93.3/91.4
91.5/89.1
16


TABLE IX
PER-TASK ROBOPRO SUCCESS (%), EASY/HARD. EACH CELL READS EASY (SR)/HARD (HSR) OVER EXACTLY 20 SEEDS PER TASK FOR ALL 80
TASKS IN EACH CONFIGURATION, THE SAME SEEDS FOR EVERY MODEL; AVERAGES ARE THE MEAN OF THE 80 PER-TASK RATES AND MATCH TABLE IV.
πgraft
0.5
X-VLAgraft
Task
Clean
Clutter
Clean
Clutter
Chain apple bin bowl rack spoon sink
15/15
10/10
0/0
0/0
Chain apple sink plate bread board
95/85
100/90
0/0
0/0
Chain bowl rack apple sink
0/0
0/0
0/0
0/0
Chain heat hamburger
45/45
85/75
20/20
0/0
Chain serve hamburger
45/45
0/0
0/0
0/0
Close drawer
100/100
100/100
0/0
0/0
Close microwave
100/100
100/40
60/60
35/35
Drop apple in bin
100/95
80/80
80/20
55/0
Empty box
95/95
100/95
80/80
30/30
Move book onto table
95/85
100/70
100/100
95/95
Move bottle
45/45
65/55
40/40
75/70
Move bottle from fridge next to can
100/100
80/80
60/0
55/0
Move can from cabinet to basket
60/60
65/60
80/80
5/5
Move cup
70/70
35/25
20/20
40/40
Move cup next to book
100/100
80/80
100/100
45/15
Move cup onto table
95/95
60/45
60/60
75/75
Move cup put pen in cup
70/70
35/10
100/100
20/15
Move cups into box
95/95
70/40
60/60
20/20
Move hamburger onto plate
100/100
90/90
0/0
40/40
Move items around
20/20
0/0
0/0
0/0
Move milk close fridge
90/90
75/45
40/0
0/0
Move pen to box
95/95
60/0
80/80
90/0
Move seal cup next to box
90/90
100/90
80/80
10/10
Move seal next to box
100/100
100/100
100/100
95/95
Move seal next to pencup
90/90
90/90
100/100
10/10
Move seal onto book
95/95
100/75
100/100
15/15
Move seal onto table
100/100
100/40
100/100
90/90
Open drawer
100/100
100/95
60/60
60/60
Organize table
20/20
5/5
0/0
0/0
Pick apple from bowl
100/10
90/35
40/0
15/0
Pick apple from sink
95/95
100/80
0/0
0/0
Pick bottle from fridge
100/100
95/35
100/100
100/100
Pick boxdrink from basket
5/5
0/0
100/60
45/0
Pick can from basket
90/5
100/0
100/0
95/45
Pick can from cabinet
100/100
100/70
60/40
80/80
Pick fork from sink
100/100
100/95
0/0
0/0
Pick hamburger from microwave
50/50
45/15
0/0
25/25
Pick milk box from fridge
100/100
95/90
100/100
90/90
Pick sauce can from cabinet
100/100
100/5
100/100
100/100
Place bowl in dishrack
85/85
100/100
100/100
30/30
Put book in fileholder
50/50
5/5
100/60
30/15
Put book on book
85/85
95/95
40/20
60/60
Put bottle in basket
100/100
50/25
80/80
90/90
Put bottle in fridge
90/90
30/0
100/100
95/95
Put bowl in sink
0/0
0/0
60/60
10/10
Put bread on board
100/95
85/60
80/0
60/0
Put can close cabinet
95/90
100/20
80/80
0/0
Put can in cabinet
85/85
100/10
80/60
95/95
Put can infront of microwave
85/85
100/70
100/100
95/95
Put can next to basket
40/25
95/95
100/100
65/65
Put cup in box
100/100
90/90
100/100
95/95
Put cup on coaster
70/70
0/0
100/100
80/80
Put cup on table
80/80
65/60
80/80
45/45
Put glue in box
100/50
95/50
100/100
80/70
Put hamburger in microwave
100/95
70/55
0/0
0/0
Put milk box in fridge
90/90
90/40
100/100
90/90
Put milktea next to laptop
65/65
65/40
80/60
60/30
Put milktea on shelf
65/65
40/25
80/80
75/40
Put mouse next to stapler
90/90
95/80
100/0
70/0
Put mouse on pad
85/85
30/30
80/80
45/5
Put pen in box
100/100
95/50
100/100
35/35
Put pen in pencup
20/15
45/20
0/0
0/0
Put phone next to cube
90/90
100/50
60/0
45/30
Put phone on holder
70/70
70/65
60/60
55/55
Put plate in sink
70/70
50/50
60/50
45/35
Put rubikscube in drawer
95/95
90/85
80/80
50/45
Put rubikscube next to milktea
60/50
20/20
80/20
30/0
Put sauce can in basket
95/75
100/65
100/100
95/55
Put sauce can in cabinet
100/100
90/5
100/100
85/70
Put seal in box
100/100
100/100
100/100
100/100
Put spoon in dishrack
90/90
95/95
20/20
30/30
Put spoon in sink
100/100
100/100
0/0
35/35
Put spoon on plate
50/50
50/50
40/0
70/0
Put stapler in drawer
95/95
95/50
50/40
80/80
Put stapler next to mouse
90/85
20/0
0/0
10/0
Put stapler on book
100/95
100/100
100/100
80/80
Set up table
40/35
5/0
0/0
0/0
Store rubikscube on shelf
75/75
60/40
0/0
0/0
Store stapler in drawer
60/60
55/35
0/0
0/0
Switch can with bottle in basket
75/0
35/10
60/0
0/0
Average
78.8/73.7
69.8/49.4
60.9/49.9
45.3/35.3
17
