Title: FLEX-WAM: Flexible Block-Causal World-Action Models for Long-Horizon Imagination and Planning

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2610.05483v1

Published Time: Tue, 06 Oct 2026 02:22:01 GMT

Number of Pages: 9

Markdown Content:
# FLEX-WAM: Flexible Block-Causal World–Action Models for Long-Horizon Imagination and Planning 

R. Khorrambakht *1, Joseph Amigo *1, F´ elix Lebel 1, Leon Seetoo 1,Jean Ponce 2,3, Zhenzhen Li 4, and Ludovic Righetti 1,5

Abstract — World–action models (WAMs) promise a unified model that predicts action-conditioned futures, generates fea-sible actions, and supports planning in imagination. However, existing joint video–action models often use computationally heavy, fixed-horizon backbones ill-suited to streaming infer-ence and stable long-horizon open-loop rollouts. We introduce FLEX-WAM, a Flexible and Efficient Block-Causal World– Action Model for unified simulation and policy inference. FLEX-WAM supports variable-length contexts and non-causal prediction horizons, as well as infinite autoregressive generation frame by frame or block by block. Its block-causal, KV-cacheable architecture combines axial attention and block-wise diffusion forcing to enable efficient real-time rollout and deployment-time latency–throughput tradeoffs without retrain-ing. Joint training can nevertheless produce plausible futures that weakly respond to commanded actions. We address this failure mode by balancing state and action flow-matching gradient contributions across the state–action diffusion-noise grid and regulating world-model sampling using Forward-Dynamics (FD) elasticity , an efficient training-time proxy for action responsiveness. Across simulated and real-world datasets, FLEX-WAM achieves superior multi-step prediction quality and latency while producing stable joint state–action rollouts for thousands of steps. As a joint action proposer and simulator within MCTS, it solves long-horizon PushT and all five OG-Bench Puzzle-4x4 tasks entirely in imagination. On a bimanual OpenArm-based robot, a single checkpoint jointly serves as a play policy and expected-outcome predictor, enabling real-time identification and collection of model–reality mismatches for future self-improvement. 

An embodied agent must answer two complementary questions: what will happen after executing an action, and what action will achieve a given task? World models ad-dress the former by predicting action-conditioned futures for imagined rollouts, planning, and control [1]–[5]; policies and inverse-dynamics models address the latter by generating feasible actions. Since these capabilities are complementary views of the same state–action trajectory distribution, jointly modeling them promises a unified model that can act, predict, and evaluate action consequences. Recent work has pursued this objective through joint video–action generative models. GR-1 jointly denoises future images and actions [6], [7], while UVA learns a shared repre-sentation with decoupled diffusion heads for policy learning,              

> *Equal contribution / These authors contributed equally to this work.
> 1Center for Robotics and Embodied Intelligence (CREO), New York University
> 2Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences and Center for Data Science, New York University
> 3Ecole normale sup´ erieure - PSL
> 4NVIDIA
> 5Artificial and Natural Intelligence Toulouse Institute (ANITI)

forward and inverse dynamics, and video prediction [8]. Most closely related to our setting, UWM couples video and action diffusion in a shared transformer with independently controlled diffusion timesteps [9]. Varying the state–action noise configuration allows a single UWM model to operate as a policy, world model, inverse-dynamics model, or video generator. More recently, pretrained video generators have also shown promise as scalable world–action models [10], [11]. However, joint modeling and flexible inference do not by themselves guarantee balanced learning, stable long-horizon generation, or real-time open-loop simulation. Most existing approaches either rely on fixed-horizon, computationally heavy video backbones that are poorly suited to streaming and infinite-horizon generation, or expose such capabilities only as a simulator [12] or a policy [11]. We introduce FLEX-WAM, a Flexible and EfficientNet Block-Causal World–Action Model, together with a training procedure for unified simulation and policy inference. FLEX-WAM supports variable-length context histories, variable-length non-causal prediction horizons, and infinite autore-gressive rollouts generated block by block or frame by frame. Its block-causal, KV-cacheable architecture enables stable rollouts over thousands of real-time steps while supporting efficient real-time generation. A central challenge in training a unified world–action model is preserving simulation capability (action responsive-ness) while learning history-driven state–action prediction vector fields in policy and video-generation modes. We address this challenge with two training-time components. First, we numerically estimate and balance the gradient contributions of independent state and action flow-matching losses across the state–action noise grid. Second, we intro-duce Forward-Dynamics (FD) elasticity , an efficient proxy for world-model action responsiveness. We monitor its degra-dation throughout training and use it to adaptively bias sampling toward world-model mode. Because a world–action model must first learn action-conditioned dynamics to serve as both a simulator and generator, our training procedure begins in pure world-model mode and gradually transitions to joint WAM training. During this transition, FD elasticity regulates the sampling schedule to preserve world-modeling capability. We evaluate FLEX-WAM’s efficiency, long-horizon sta-bility, and unified multi-mode capabilities by deploying it jointly as a simulator and action proposer within Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS). Planning entirely in FLEX-WAM’s arXiv:2610.05483v1 [cs.RO] 4 Oct 2026 imagination, the resulting system solves long-horizon, multi-step puzzle tasks from OGBench [13] as well as real-world PushT motion-planning tasks. We further present preliminary bimanual-robot results in which a single FLEX-WAM checkpoint jointly serves as a policy and expected-outcome predictor. This unified deployment enables real-time detection and automatic collection of counterfactual examples, providing a path toward improving learned world models through real-world interaction. Our contributions are summarized as follows:  

> •

We introduce FLEX-WAM, an open-source 1 block-causal world–action model that supports frame-by-frame and block-by-block autoregressive prediction, variable context horizons, and KV-cacheable rollouts stable over thousands of real-time steps.  

> •

We introduce a gradient-calibrated, feedback-regulated two-stage training procedure that measures and pre-serves the action responsiveness required for temporally dense simulation.  

> •

We evaluate the proposed architecture on simulated and real-world datasets, demonstrating competitive predic-tion quality and rollout efficiency relative to represen-tative state-of-the-art world–action models.  

> •

We show that FLEX-WAM can solve long-horizon plan-ning tasks entirely in imagination when deployed jointly as an action proposer and simulator within MCTS.  

> •

We demonstrate the potential of unified world–action models to identify and collect counterfactual examples for self-improvement during real-world deployment. I. M ETHOD 

A. WAM as a Joint Flow Matching Model 

We define a WAM as a joint generative model of state ( zt)and action ( at) sequences: 

pθ (zt:t+H , a t:t+H ) , (1) We merge ideas from [12], [14] and model this distribu-tion as a flow matching model with per-modality and per-timestep independent state and action signal levels τst and 

τat . The per-modality independence allows diverse training and inference modes including world model ( τa = 1 , τ s ∈

[0 , 1] ), inverse dynamics ( τa ∈ [0 , 1] , τ s = 1 ), video model (τa = 0 , τ s ∈ [0 , 1] ) and joint state-action generative model (τa ∈ [0 , 1] , τ s ∈ [0 , 1] ). On the other hand the per-frame noise control allows any subset of the model input tokens to serve as clean context or prediction horizon and improves the model long-horizon rollout stability by exposing it to various context perturbations that effectively reduce the distribution mismatch between a context filled with the model’s own predictions during inference and ground-truth during training time [14]. 

> 1Code and checkpoints are omitted for anonymous review and will be released upon acceptance

B. FLEX-WAM: Architecture 

Our core axial attention efficient transformer architecture and multi-modal tokenizer are based on the DreamerV4 world model [12] (Fig. 1). However, we extend this frame-work both architecturally and training-wise both necessitated by the joint state-action modeling. 

1) Block-Causal Axial Transformer: We build our tok-enizer and dynamics model on top of block-causal axial transfomer blocks described in this section. Stacking per-timestep token sets S along time T and fusing them spa-tiotemporally is subject to O(( T S )2) compute complexity due to attention operations. Instead, we adopt axial atten-tion where each layer only fuses information spatially or temporally and is subject to lower computational complexity of O(T S 2 + ST 2) [15]. We adopt RoPE [16] as positional embedding in each layer and interleave the architecture with AdaLN layers in case text/task conditioning is required (in this paper we do not use text/class conditioning because text and action are competing information regarding the future of a rollout and impair the model’s capability as a simulator). Instead of training the model fully causally as in [12] (reduced quality in predicting long horizons), fully bi-directionally [9] (not KV-cacheable), or with partitioned causal context and bi-directional horizon [17] (committing to a fixed horizon length set in training time), we propose variable block size block causal attention as a randomized knob during training and configurable setting during infer-ence. Specifically, frames are partitioned into contiguous blocks of B frames where frame q may attend to frame k

iff b(k) ≤ b(q), where b(·) is the block index: attention is bidirectional within a block and strictly causal across blocks (Fig 1.d). During training, we draw K once per forward pass, from {1, 2, 4, 8, 16 }, shared by every sequence in the batch. As a result, block size is a deployment-time choice that allows our model to operate either completely causally (B = 1) or block-by-block ( B > 1) when a predictive horizon larger than one is needed. 

2) Multi-View Tokenizer: As formulated in [12], our tok-enizer is a masked auto-encoder [18], trained to reconstruct spatially and temporally randomly masked modalities. The encoder attention mask is set such that, each modality can only attend to itself while the latent tokens can attend to the modalities and themselves. On the other hand in the decoder each modality can attend to itself and the latent while the latent can only attend to itself. This ensures that during encoding, cross modality information has passed the latents and in the decoding they are decoded purely from latents and not affected by each other. In this paper, encoder and decoder are both fully causal in time ( B = 1 ) and block sizes larger than one is unnecessary. 

3) Dynamics Model (WAM): As mentioned in Sec. I-A, we implement the WAM dynamics as a flow matching model with the following tokens per each timestep: 

[ z1:256 

> t

| {z } 

> state

| r1:4 

|{z} 

> registers

| τst | τat

| {z }

> noise levels

| at

|{z} 

> action

], (2) Fig. 1. WAM. (a) The tokenizer encodes every camera view into one shared set of latents per frame, and is trained to reconstruct masked patches; views never attend to each other, so the latents are the only path between them. (b) Both networks hold their tokens on a frame × token grid and attend along one axis per layer. (c) The dynamics model denoises one 263 -token set per frame — latents, registers, the two noise levels, and the action — into clean latents and action velocities. (d) Its attention in time is block-causal: a frame attends to its own block in both directions and to every earlier block, never to a later one. 

thus S = 263 tokens in our implementation. The two signal levels — τs for the states, τa for the actions are discrete inputs with 128 possible levels (to allow future extension to short-cut models) and are sampled independently from a square grid of 128 × 128 . The register tokens r1:4 are placeholders for the model to carry forward information from the past if needed and operate like a scratchpad areas/short-term memory slots for the model [12]. II. T RAINING 

1) Blockwise Diffusion Forcing: A naive adoption of diffusion forcing in our setting would sample an independent noise level per modality and timestep incurring 128 × 128 ×

T possible settings. Such large sampling set implies that homogeneous coverage would necessitate millions of training steps. To mitigate this issue and better represent the actual inference time applications where full blocks are denoised at a time, we sample per-modality noise at temporally identical noise levels within each block. Combined with random selection of block sizes, our sampling will asymptotically cover per-frame diffusion forcing given sufficient iterations. Finally, for each block we use x-prediction to train the state velocity field in order to assign more model capacity to high-noise portions of the flow path and v-prediction for actions in order to focus network capacity toward cleaner portions. 

2) Action-State Gradient Normalization: In a joint multi-stream architecture like ours, the state and action losses 

Lobs , Lact , compete for one set of shared network param-eters. Added together at fixed per-modality weight, the gradient force from each channel is not guaranteed to reach the shared trunk equally and across flow-matching noise grid. We weight the two flow-matching losses, Lobs by wobs 

and Lact by wact ,

wm = 1

Z · Φm ramp m

Sm

p ˆLm

, (3) built from two factors set by the block’s noise levels, Φm

and ramp m; a measured gradient scale Sm

p ˆLm; and one rescale Z common to both losses. 

a) Φ and ramp m: Φ splits a unit weight across two losses using the other quantity’s cleanness, 

Φact = τs + ετs + τa + 2 ε , Φobs = τa + ετs + τa + 2 ε , (4) summing to 1 (ε = 10 −3), so world-model weight is high when action is clean and the state is not, and vice versa. The ramp ramp m = βm + (1 − βm)τm instead weights a loss by its own cleanness, low noise counting more than high. It is the same ramp used in Dreamer 4 [12], with βobs = 0 .2.

b) Calibration: We reweight both losses by the denom-inator of (3) to equal gradient magnitude, and to modulate their relative importance solely with Φ and the ramp. ˆLm is an EMA of the unweighted loss m, tracked over the noise grid. Sm is the norm of the trunk gradient of Lm alone, re-measured every 500 training steps by backpropagating each loss term on its own. 

c) Action Sensitivity Regulation: In a temporally dense WAM architecture such as ours, consecutive frames are highly correlated, creating an imbalance between the condi-tioned and unconditioned vector fields in world-model mode, 

v(zt+1 |at, z t−C:t) and v(zt+1 |ϕ, z t−C:t).To ensure the world model capability is preserved, we propose a dual stage training protocol: we first train the model in world model mode only ( τa = 1, τ s ∈ [0 , 1] )while estimating the normalized sensitivity of the latents to action perturbations around a subset of evaluation windows using a Hutchinson estimator. Calling this the Forward Dynamics (FD) elasticity sensor, we empirically observe that this sensitivity metric reaches a smaller peak compared to a purely WM-mode training under uniform noise sampling for state and action (WAM training protocol). Thus, in the second stage after the metric converges in WM-only mode, we define a closed-loop feedback regulator with a setpoint chosen at 90 percent of WM-only sensitivity and the control input being the sampling bias of WM mode during training (Sec. III-B.1). III. R ESULTS 

A. Experimental Setup 

We evaluate FLEX-WAM across five domains chosen to isolate core capabilities: generation quality and inference efficiency on LIBERO, action sensitivity and planning on PushT, long-horizon planning on OGBench, long-rollout generation on Unitree G1 data, and closed-loop deployment on OpenArm. As action-faithful world modeling requires exposure to outcomes beyond predominantly successful demonstrations, our real-world experiments primarily use teleoperated play data containing diverse and often subop-timal interactions. Table I summarizes each domain’s role. For PushT, we use a four-hour real-world play dataset for action-sensitivity evaluation and planning [5]. We addition-ally use the OGBench 4 × 4 visual-puzzle task for long-horizon planning [13]. We validate the scalability of our model in learning complex embodiments and tasks, by training on the play dataset from [19] of a Unitree G1 humanoid robot with a head-mounted camera and BrainCoV2 dexterous hands ma-nipulating a bag with flexible handle which forces the model to capture the intricate complexities of the fingers and handle interaction only from a ego-centric camera 5(a). Finally, we show preliminary results on the ability of FLEX-WAM in self-discovering corner-cases where the world model is weak, through a short play dataset and an OpenArmV1 bi-manual station manipulating an articulated drawer toolbox (Fig. 8). Based on task and embodiment complexity, we train our model at three scales: (690M for G1, LIBERO, and OpenArm and 512M for OGBench, and 400M for PushT) under Distributed Data Parallel (DDP) training on 8 NVIDIA H100 GPUs each for roughly 150k gradient steps (4 days). The models are all initialized randomly (no large-scale video pretraining), and with effective batch size of 64, and context length 32.Finally, our local inference results are carried out using up to 4 NVIDIA RTX6000 Pro MaxQ cards (for real-time inference with batch size of 1 a single card is sufficient). We adopt bfloat16 mixed precision and torch.compile opti-mizations to accelerate training and inference. 

B. Design Choices 

In this section we empirically validate our action sensitiv-ity FD sensor and the dual-stage training protocol in Sec. II-.2.c, and the importance of block-causality in improving temporal consistency in horizon prediction.   

> (a) (b) Fig. 2. WAM response to synthetic counterfactual stop command along a random set of PushT dataset trajectories with and without training-time feedback regulation.

1) Dual-Stage Training Protocol and FD-Sensor Valid-ity: In a temporally dense WAM architecture such as ours, consecutive frames are highly correlated, creating an imbalance between the conditioned and unconditioned vector fields in world-model mode, v(zt+1 |at, z t−C:t) and 

v(zt+1 |ϕ, z t−C:t). Classifier-free guidance (CFG) could re-balance their relative strengths at runtime, but would require two GPUs to maintain minimal latency. As described in Sec. II-.2.c, we instead propose training-time closed-loop regulation based on FD elasticity, an effi-cient proxy for the model’s responsiveness to actions. We test whether this proxy correlates positively with world-model responsiveness using a counterfactual probe. Because PushT is quasi-static, we construct a synthetic case in which the WM follows actions from dataset trajectories and then stops when the action is set to null: zero for relative actions, or the last action for absolute actions. The expected ground truth is the final state before the pause. We measure the distance from the generated image to this state using DINOv2 features, and interpret zero distance as perfect action response. Fig. 2(b) shows FD sensitivity throughout training across three variants, normalized by the maximum sensitivity reached by the WAM trained purely in world-model mode (τa = 1 ). Fig. 2(a) shows the corresponding capability mea-sured by the DINO probe, normalized by the best response of a WM-only model. This clearly shows the advantage afforded by our feedback mechanism. WM-only model is trained in world-model mode; its capability rises during training and converges to a stable baseline. No Feedback denotes our WAM trained normally without capability measurement or regulation. Its capability rises to a peak below the WM-only baseline and then de-clines. With Feedback is first trained in WM-only mode until convergence, after which a closed-loop WM-only sampling bias against other modes is activated and regulated using the training-time FD elasticity (WM capability) measurement. This regulates WM action sensitivity around a setpoint around the peak achieved in WM-only pre-training while gradually permitting non-WM modes. In our experiment, the WM-mode sampling bias starts near one and converges to approximately 0.2 following a nontrivial schedule that would TABLE I EXPERIMENTAL DOMAINS AND THEIR ROLES IN OUR EVALUATION .                        

> Domain Dataset / Platform Evaluation Purpose Model Size Primary Evidence
> Simulation LIBERO Generation quality and inference latency 690M SSIM, PSNR, and latency Real-world play PushT Action sensitivity and planning 400M DINO response and imagined planning Puzzle, Cube, Scene OGBench Long-horizon planning 512M Imagined task success Humanoid Unitree G1 Long-horizon rollout 690M Qualitative rollout stability Deployment OpenArm Model-reality mismatch detection 690M Closed-loop case study

be difficult to hand-tune as a fixed parameter if not controlled through feedback. 

2) Block-Causality vs Fully Causal Horizon: In model-predictive control and accurate block-by-block rollout sta-bility, a world action model should be capable of rolling out from the current moment up to a fixed horizon without breaking the temporal consistency between the frames. Flex-WAM being trained on variable blocks of bidirectional attention allows the frames within a chosen horizon during rollout attend to each other in both temporal directions. Here we show how bi-directionality indeed facilitate temporal consistency by denoising a fixed horizon of 16 frames in parallel while sweeping the block attention width from 1 (fully causal) to 16 (fully bidirectional). We conduct this experiment on a FLEX-WAM trained on the G1 dataset and show the qualitative and quantitative results in Fig. 3. The FVD [20] plot measures the semantic video distance between 256 seeded and unconditional (no history of the past frames) generated sequences vs 256 ground truth clips and its lower value indicates a higher spatiotemporal similarity to the ground-truth. We also measure the temporal smoothness by computing the LPIPS and L2 distances between consecutive frames and actions respectively, and normalized against their average value in training dataset. A lower number for these two metrics indicate closer similarity in terms of motion and action smoothness to the ground truth. As shown both by the qualitative snapshots and the plots, bidirectionality is positively correlated with the temporal smoothness and consistency with the ground truth. We also interestingly note that when the model is seeded with past frames, the pressure to attend to the future is much lower. We hypothesize that the model predictive uncertainty (e.g. multi-modal futures) is positively correlated with stronger reliance on non-causal temporal attention activities and leave it as a promising future research direction. 

C. Latency and Long-Horizon Generation Stability 

We now compare our FLEX-WAM architecture with other joint video-action generative models to test its relative infer-ence speed and long-horizon generation quality. 

1) Baselines: We compare FLEX-WAM with represen-tative joint video-action generative models. Specifically, UWM [9] has a closest formulation to our independent flow-matching objective, while Cosmos-Policy and DreamZero build on large pretrained video-generation backbones. To ensure fair comparison, we adopt released pre-trained check-points for the LIBERO benchmark (DreamZero did not have      

> Fig. 3. Bi-directional attention along the horizon facilitates temporal consistency and smoothness by allowing past frames to attend to the future ones during denoise process. Snapshots show decoded frames from FLEX-WAM with no seed history frames under causal and fully bidirectional attention showing broken temporal consistency in fully causal mode. Plots quantify this by measuring cross frame visual and action distances and dataset-model FVD distance.
> (a) (b) Fig. 4. Inference-time scaling of FLEX-WAM. (a) Per-step latency as a function of model size under fully causal inference. (b) Block-generation rate and effective frame throughput as the inference block size varies. All block-size results use the same checkpoint; increasing Btrades causal latency for greater frame-level throughput.

such checkpoints so we do not benchmark generation quality) and train a multi-view FLEX-WAM on the same dataset. 

2) Inference Latency: Deployment as a policy or in-teractive simulator requires low-latency observation-action generation. We evaluate FLEX-WAM in fully causal mode (B = 1), using a 32-step KV cache and 8 denoising steps. Table II reports per-step latency native inference configuration of each method. Fig. 4(a) shows how it grows with model size. We run each baseline under the official TABLE II INFERENCE TIME (LATENCY ) OF OUR MODEL VS . BASELINES .Policy WM Joint Cosmos Policy (2B) 330 .5±3.9 47 .0±1.0† 480 .6±7.1          

> DreamZero (5B) 801 .4±102 .0−801 .4±102 .0
> UWM (393M) 34 .1±0.234 .4±0.434 .6±0.1
> Ours (690M) 71 .5±1.072 .7±0.371 .5±1.0
> †The reduced inference latency is due to the official implementation using a single denoising step in WM mode.

inference setting, most importantly the number of denoising steps. FLEX-WAM achieves competitive inference latency under comparable model scales and denoising settings, while additionally supporting adjustable blockwise inference. Fur-thermore, Fig. 4(b) shows the benefit of flexible block-size in our block-causal architecture. Specifically, we can maintain real-time low-latency inference speeds by choosing 

B = 1 or trade it off gradually with inference throughput by increasing the horizon length (e.g. needed in WM efficient inference in evaluating policies with action-chunk output). Block size therefore serves as a deployment-time control over the latency-throughput trade-off without requiring retraining. 

3) Generative Quality and Rollout Stability: Thanks to per-block diffusion forcing, random context dropout, and KV-caching, our model can run autoregressively for thou-sands of frames either as a simulator or a real-time joint state-action streamer. Fig. 5(a) presents the decoded dream states of our model over 1024 autoregressive steps in joint state-action prediction mode. Across the illustrated real-world and simulated domains, the trajectories remain visually coherent throughout the rollout without obvious catastrophic accumulation artifacts. Furthermore, Fig. 6 compares the generative quality of our model against baselines on the LIBERO tasks qualitatively and Table. III reports SSIM and PSNR over prediction horizons from T = 16 to T = 64 . To ensure comparisons are fair, we only compare in world model mode where actions ground all the models to the same future outcome. Notably both baselines predict the terminal state given the current observation and a fixed-length action chunk with no KV-caching feature. Thus, we compute future states by feeding their context with the current prediction and jumping a chunk length at a time. As shown, our model exhibits highly stable generation and quality (after decoding). Because DreamZero does not support world model mode officially, we train it on our G1 example purely under WM mode ( τa = 1)and compare it to our architecture trained under identical WM-only setting. Fig. 7 shows the qualitative results and shows that while both are trained on the full-scale dataset, our model exhibits more ground-truth consistency and no hallucinations/object deformations. We note that DreamZero as a representative of many WAMs is defined as a joint generator of state and actions (thus WAM) and is not officially intended as a simulator. FLEX-WAM achieves higher SSIM and PSNR than the evaluated baselines at every horizon. Among the tested in-ference configurations, B = 8 provides the strongest overall generation quality, while B = 16 remains comparable at longer horizons. 

D. Long-Horizon In-Imagination Planning 

Solving long horizon tasks through planning requires a stable world model to simulate future outcomes of potential actions, and an affordance-aware action sampler to reduce the planning search space to plausible action primitives. Our FLEX-WAM highly stable long-horizon joint world-action rollout capability alongside its chunked prediction mode can serve as unified simulation and action sampler component in MCTS. Specifically, it accelerates planning through two mechanisms: 1) variable causal attention block-size allows choosing B > 1 during sampling thus cutting the autoregressive steps by a factor of B and 2) it predicts state and action jointly at the same time thus removing the need for step-by-step third-party policy rollout in feedback with our model as a simulator. In this section we demonstrate how FLEX-WAM incorporated in the MCTS algorithm from [5] can both solve the demonstrated PushT problem and a challenging long-horizon 4×4 light-out puzzle problem from the OGBench benchmark [13]. 

1) FLEX-WAM in MCTS: Each tree node holds a latent state together with a short context of past frames (at most 

3 frames of states and actions). An edge is a rollout of FLEX-WAM in joint state-action mode, H frames long, that represents a random affordance-aware primitive action when the robot is at a particular node. Due to the inference-time stochasticity ( z0 ∼ N (0 , I )) and goal-free nature of the play dataset, each inference produces a different plausible future (MCTS with a task-conditioned WAM is less challenging to solve due to the sampling strong bias towards expert actions). An edge of H frames is generated in H/B successive calls of B frames each. In our implementation, we assume M = 5 

of such samples in each tree expansion step (parallelizable over multiple GPU). Each leaf is selected based on the UCB1 score, we run a Hsim -step simulation and scored it using a specific rule that depends on the task considered. Each new child is checked against a goal test on its terminal state. The search stops as soon as a child corresponds to a terminal state, and the plan is the path from the root to that node 

2) Experiments: Fig. 5(b) shows one plan per task, each found entirely in FLEX-WAM imagination: the search tree on the left, with the returned plan in orange, and the decoded imagined states along the plan on the right. Both tasks need                                            

> TABLE III GENERATION QUALITY VS HORIZON
> SSIM (↑) / PSNR (↑, dB)
> Baseline T=16 T=32 T=48 T=64
> UWM 0.652/18.3 0.624/17.1 0.610/16.4 0.599/15.6 Cosmos-Policy 0.682/20.4 0.626/18.3 0.604/17.2 0.587/16.5 Ours (B=1) 0.828/23.9 0.797/21.4 0.778/20.3 0.764/19.9 Ours (B=8) 0.843/24.8 0.812/22.5 0.788/21.1 0.778/20.5 Ours (B=16) 0.828/24.1 0.806/22.3 0.787/21.1 0.776/20.5 (a)
> (b) Fig. 5. (a) FLEX-WAM’s KV-cached block-causal architecture and blockwise diffusion forcing training enables very long stable autoregressive generation and simulation for thousands of frames. Above shows sample 1024-step autoregressive rollouts of FLEX-WAM trained on two teleoperated real-world datasets (human play) and a simulated puzzle task with 216 states from the OGBench [13] benchmark. (b) Visualization of two long-horizon plans solved entirely in FLEX-WAM imagination with MCTS. On the left, the search trees: node colours are the task rewards (in [0 ,1] , light to dark), hollow rings are children created but never simulated, highlighted path is the returned plan. On the right, the decoded imagined states along the returned plan.
> Fig. 6. Autoregressive rollout in world model mode with actions provided from the evaluation dataset and decoded states visualized.

long sequences of intermediate steps that bring no immediate improvement, one of the benefits of tree search over greedy action selection. 

a) PushT on real robot data: The goal is to push the T to the center of table, upright (the position of the end-effector is ignored). The reward scores how close the T’s position and orientation in the decoded image are to the goal ( r ∈ [0 , 1] ). A node reaches the goal when r ≥ 0.9. A leaf is scored by the best discounted return along its M = 5 simulated rollouts (γ = 0 .98 ): R = max m≤M

PHsim  

> t=0

γtr(zmt ). The edges and simulated rollouts are 16 frames long, generated in two 8-frame blocks, with a budget of 100 MCTS iterations.. The   

> Fig. 7. Open-loop rollout (4.5 seconds) of DreamZero and our model both trained under identical WM mode ( τa= 1 ) vs ground truth.

plan in Fig. 5(b) ( 7 edges, 112 frames) turns the T from lying on its side to upright at the centre. 

b) OGBench Puzzle 4x4: We follow the evaluation protocol of OGBench’s visual-puzzle-4x4 : 5 tasks, each given as a goal image from a given board and robot arm configuration. Each task requires 4 to 7 button presses. We learn a goal-conditioned value function on FLEX-WAM’s tokenizer latents from the play data, with the offline RL objective of GCIVL [21]. It predicts how many steps d

separate a state from the goal image, and the planner uses 

γd ∈ [0 , 1] as reward ( γ = 0.99 ). Because this value already measures distance to the goal, a leaf is scored by the value of the last frame of its simulated rollouts (best of 

4): R = max m≤M r(zmHsim ). The edges and the simulated rollouts are 24 frames long, generated in 8-frame blocks, TABLE IV OPEN -LOOP PERFORMANCES OF OUR WAM MODEL WITH MCTS ON 

OGB ENCH V I S U A L -P U Z Z L E -4 X4 EVALUATION SET .Task Solved Median MCTS Plan length (frames) iterations to goal (mean and min-max) 1 17/20 234 145 (72–192) 2 17/20 270 160 (96–216) 3 14/20 188 149 (96–168) 4 14/20 242 171 (120–240) 5 18/20 205 161 (120–240) All 80/100 (80%) 228 157 (72–240) 

Fig. 8. The joint state-action prediction capability and real-time speed of FLEX-WAM allows closed loop deployment and near-future prediction in image-space on the fly, facilitating the identification of counterfactual training samples for continual self-improvement and early warning for human intervention based training. Above shows the model trained on a small dataset hallucinating a box to pick next to the real camera feed. 

with a budget of 600 MCTS iterations. The search stops when goal board configuration is reached. With this learned value, the planner solves every one of the five tasks and Table IV shows a success rate of 80% under the OGBench benchmark settings. A qualitative visualization of one of the solved plans is shown in Fig. 5(b) where the filmstrip shows the board state after each key-press. We note that in this work the success is measured as achieved in imagination: a plan counts when its imagined final state reaches the goal. Executing the plans closed loop on the real system is left to future work. 

E. Closed-Loop Deployment and Counterfactual Example Discovery 

Inspired by DAgger [22], in this section we show how the real-time performance of our WAM deployed as a closed-loop policy (sending the real camera images into the KV-cache instead of the predicted ones) enables us to record a corrective dataset of counterfactual examples. First, we train our WAM on an intentionally short 2-hour teleoperated play dataset using our OpenArm platform. At deployment time, the robot performs random play actions as seen in the dataset while at the same time predicting the expected outcome of each action before performing it. The difference between this prediction and real outcome then serves as an error signal for identifying and potentially up-weighing important samples in the self-recorded dataset. This has been demonstrated in Fig. 8 where the WAM hallucinates a box to pick in the next timestep alongside the true observation. IV. C ONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 

We presented FLEX-WAM, a unified world-action model that combines balanced, feedback-regulated training with adaptive block-causal generation. Gradient calibration bal-ances the state and action objectives, while sensitivity regu-lation preserves action-faithful world-model behavior during joint training. Randomized block-size training and blockwise diffusion forcing allow a single checkpoint to operate from framewise causal prediction to higher-throughput parallel block generation, enabling flexible and efficient long-horizon rollouts without retraining. These capabilities allow FLEX-WAM to provide both action proposals and imagined out-comes for planning and to expose model-reality mismatches during closed-loop deployment. Executing imagined plans in the real world and using detected mismatches for continual model improvement remain important directions for future work. V. A CKNOWLEDGMENT 

This work was supported in part by the US National Science Foundation under Grants 2222815 and 2315396, by gifts from Wandercraft, Ultra, NVIDIA, Infinite Machines and in part by the French AI Interdisciplinary Institute ANITI. ANITI is funded by the France 2030 program under Grant Agreement number ANR-23-IACL-0002. REFERENCES [1] C. Finn, I. Goodfellow, and S. Levine, “Unsupervised learning for physical interaction through video prediction,” Advances in neural information processing systems , vol. 29, 2016. [2] C. Finn and S. Levine, “Deep visual foresight for planning robot motion,” in 2017 IEEE international conference on robotics and automation (ICRA) . IEEE, 2017, pp. 2786–2793. [3] D. Hafner et al. , “Learning latent dynamics for planning from pixels,” in International conference on machine learning . PMLR, 2019, pp. 2555–2565. [4] D. Hafner, J. Pasukonis, J. Ba, and T. Lillicrap, “Mastering diverse control tasks through world models,” Nature , vol. 640, no. 8059, pp. 647–653, 2025. [5] R. Khorrambakht et al. , “Worldplanner: Monte carlo tree search and mpc with action-conditioned visual world models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.03077 , 2025. [6] H. Wu et al. , “Unleashing large-scale video generative pre-training for visual robot manipulation,” in International Conference on Learning Representations , vol. 2024, 2024, pp. 10 641–10 662. [7] Y. Guo et al. , “Prediction with action: Visual policy learning via joint denoising process,” Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , vol. 37, pp. 112 386–112 410, 2024. [8] S. Li, Y. Gao, D. Sadigh, and S. Song, “Unified video action model, 2025,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.00200 , 2025. [9] C. Zhu et al. , “Unified world models: Coupling video and action diffusion for pretraining on large robotic datasets,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.02792 , 2025. [10] H. Bi et al. , “Motus: A unified latent action world model,” in 

Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , 2026, pp. 35 101–35 113. [11] S. Ye et al. , “World action models are zero-shot policies,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.15922 , 2026. [12] D. Hafner, W. Yan, and T. Lillicrap, “Training agents inside of scalable world models,” 2025. [Online]. Available: https: //arxiv.org/abs/2509.24527 [13] S. Park, K. Frans, B. Eysenbach, and S. Levine, “Ogbench: Bench-marking offline goal-conditioned rl,” in International Conference on Learning Representations , vol. 2025, 2025, pp. 94 937–94 982. [14] B. Chen et al. , “Diffusion forcing: Next-token prediction meets full-sequence diffusion,” Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , vol. 37, pp. 24 081–24 125, 2024. [15] J. Ho, N. Kalchbrenner, D. Weissenborn, and T. Salimans, “Axial attention in multidimensional transformers,” 2019. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1912.12180 [16] J. Su et al. , “Roformer: Enhanced transformer with rotary position embedding,” Neurocomputing , vol. 568, p. 127063, 2024. [17] N. Agarwal et al. , “Cosmos 3: Omnimodal world models for physical ai,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2606.02800 , 2026. [18] K. He et al. , “Masked autoencoders are scalable vision learners,” 2021. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2111.06377 [19] J. Amigo, R. Khorrambakht, N. Mansard, and L. Righetti, “Coupled local and global world models for efficient first order rl,” Conference on Robot Learning , 2026. [20] T. Unterthiner et al. , “FVD: A new metric for video generation,” 2019. [Online]. Available: https://openreview.net/forum?id=rylgEULtdN [21] I. Kostrikov, A. Nair, and S. Levine, “Offline reinforcement learning with implicit q-learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.06169 , 2021. [22] S. Ross, G. Gordon, and D. Bagnell, “A reduction of imitation learning and structured prediction to no-regret online learning,” in Proceedings of the fourteenth international conference on artificial intelligence and statistics . JMLR Workshop and Conference Proceedings, 2011, pp. 627–635.